Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, and distinguished Members of the House and Senate,
honored guests, and fellow citizens: Less than 3 weeks ago, I joined you on the
West Front of this very building and, looking over the monuments to our proud
past, offered you my hand in filling the next page of American history with a
story of extended prosperity and continued peace. And tonight I'm back to offer
you my plans as well. The hand remains extended; the sleeves are rolled up;
America is waiting; and now we must produce. Together, we can build a better
America.

It is comforting to return to this historic Chamber. Here, 22 years ago, I first
raised my hand to be sworn into public life. So, tonight I feel as if I'm
returning home to friends. And I intend, in the months and years to come, to
give you what friends deserve: frankness, respect, and my best judgment about
ways to improve America's future. In return, I ask for an honest commitment to
our common mission of progress. If we seize the opportunities on the road before
us, there'll be praise enough for all. The people didn't send us here to bicker,
and it's time to govern.

And many Presidents have come to this Chamber in times of great crisis: war and
depression, loss of national spirit. And 8 years ago, I sat in that very chair
as President Reagan spoke of punishing inflation and devastatingly high interest
rates and people out of work -- American confidence on the wane. And our
challenge is different. We're fortunate -- a much changed landscape lies before
us tonight. So, I don't propose to reverse direction. We're headed the right
way, but we cannot rest. We're a people whose energy and drive have fueled our
rise to greatness. And we're a forward-looking nation -- generous, yes, but
ambitious, not for ourselves but for the world. Complacency is not in our
character -- not before, not now, not ever.

And so, tonight we must take a strong America and make it even better. We must
address some very real problems. We must establish some very clear priorities.
And we must make a very substantial cut in the Federal budget deficit. Some
people find that agenda impossible, but I'm presenting to you tonight a
realistic plan for tackling it. My plan has four broad features: attention to
urgent priorities, investment in the future, an attack on the deficit, and no
new taxes. This budget represents my best judgment of how we can address our
priorities. There are many areas in which we would all like to spend more than I
propose; I understand that. But we cannot until we get our fiscal house in
order.

Next year alone, thanks to economic growth, without any change in the law, the
Federal Government will take in over $80 billion more than it does this year.
That's right -- over $80 billion in new revenues, with no increases in taxes.
And our job is to allocate those new resources wisely. We can afford to increase
spending by a modest amount, but enough to invest in key priorities and still
cut the deficit by almost 40 percent in 1 year. And that will allow us to meet
the targets set forth in the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law. But to do that, we must
recognize that growth above inflation in Federal programs is not preordained,
that not all spending initiatives were designed to be immortal.

I make this pledge tonight: My team and I are ready to work with the Congress,
to form a special leadership group, to negotiate in good faith, to work day and
night -- if that's what it takes -- to meet the budget targets and to produce a
budget on time.

We cannot settle for business as usual. Government by continuing resolution, or
government by crisis, will not do. And I ask the Congress tonight to approve
several measures which will make budgeting more sensible. We could save time and
improve efficiency by enacting 2-year budgets. Forty-three Governors have the
line-item veto. Presidents should have it, too. And at the very least, when a
President proposes to rescind Federal spending, the Congress should be required
to vote on that proposal instead of killing it by inaction. And I ask the
Congress to honor the public's wishes by passing a constitutional amendment to
require a balanced budget. Such an amendment, once phased in, will discipline
both the Congress and the executive branch.

Several principles describe the kind of America I hope to build with your help
in the years ahead. We will not have the luxury of taking the easy, spendthrift
approach to solving problems because higher spending and higher taxes put
economic growth at risk. Economic growth provides jobs and hope. Economic growth
enables us to pay for social programs. Economic growth enhances the security of
the Nation, and low tax rates create economic growth.

I believe in giving Americans greater freedom and greater choice. And I will
work for choice for American families, whether in the housing in which they
live, the schools to which they send their children, or the child care they
select for their young. You see, I believe that we have an obligation to those
in need, but that government should not be the provider of first resort for
things that the private sector can produce better. I believe in a society that
is free from discrimination and bigotry of any kind. And I will work to knock
down the barriers left by past discrimination and to build a more tolerant
society that will stop such barriers from ever being built again.

I believe that family and faith represent the moral compass of the Nation. And
I'll work to make them strong, for as Benjamin Franklin said: "If a sparrow
cannot fall to the ground without His notice, can a great nation rise without
His aid?" And I believe in giving people the power to make their own lives
better through growth and opportunity. And together, let's put power in the
hands of people.

Three weeks ago, we celebrated the bicentennial inaugural, the 200th anniversary
of the first Presidency. And if you look back, one thing is so striking about
the way the Founding Fathers looked at America. They didn't talk about
themselves. They talked about posterity. They talked about the future. And we,
too, must think in terms bigger than ourselves. We must take actions today that
will ensure a better tomorrow. We must extend American leadership in technology,
increase long-term investment, improve our educational system, and boost
productivity. These are the keys to building a better future, and here are some
of my recommendations:

I propose almost $2.2 billion for the National Science Foundation to promote
basic research and keep us on track to double its budget by 1993.

I propose to make permanent the tax credit for research and development.

I've asked Vice President Quayle to chair a new Task Force on Competitiveness.

And I request funding for NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)
and a strong space program, an increase of almost $2.4 billion over the current
fiscal year. We must have a manned space station; a vigorous, safe space shuttle
program; and more commercial development in space. The space program should
always go "full throttle up." And that's not just our ambition; it's our
destiny.

I propose that we cut the maximum tax rate on capital gains to increase
long-term investment. History on this is clear -- this will increase revenues,
help savings, and create new jobs. We won't be competitive if we leave whole
sectors of America behind. This is the year we should finally enact urban
enterprise zones and bring hope to the inner cities.

But the most important competitiveness program of all is one which improves
education in America. When some of our students actually have trouble locating
America on a map of the world, it is time for us to map a new approach to
education. We must reward excellence and cut through bureaucracy. We must help
schools that need help the most. We must give choice to parents, students,
teachers, and principals; and we must hold all concerned accountable. In
education, we cannot tolerate mediocrity. I want to cut that dropout rate and
make America a more literate nation, because what it really comes down to is
this: The longer our graduation lines are today, the shorter our unemployment
lines will be tomorrow.

So, tonight I'm proposing the following initiatives: the beginning of a $500
million program to reward America's best schools, merit schools; the creation of
special Presidential awards for the best teachers in every State, because
excellence should be rewarded; the establishment of a new program of National
Science Scholars, one each year for every Member of the House and Senate, to
give this generation of students a special incentive to excel in science and
mathematics; the expanded use of magnet schools, which give families and
students greater choice; and a new program to encourage alternative
certification, which will let talented people from all fields teach in our
classrooms. I've said I'd like to be the "Education President." And tonight, I'd
ask you to join me by becoming the "Education Congress."

Just last week, as I settled into this new office, I received a letter from a
mother in Pennsylvania who had been struck by my message in the Inaugural
Address. "Not 12 hours before," she wrote, "my husband and I received word that
our son was addicted to cocaine. He had the world at his feet. Bright, gifted,
personable -- he could have done anything with his life. And now he has chosen
cocaine." "And please," she wrote, "find a way to curb the supply of cocaine.
Get tough with the pushers. Our son needs your help."

My friends, that voice crying out for help could be the voice of your own
neighbor, your own friend, your own son. Over 23 million Americans used illegal
drugs last year, at a staggering cost to our nation's well-being. Let this be
recorded as the time when America rose up and said no to drugs. The scourge of
drugs must be stopped. And I am asking tonight for an increase of almost a
billion dollars in budget outlays to escalate the war against drugs. The war
must be waged on all fronts. Our new drug czar, Bill Bennett, and I will be
shoulder to shoulder in the executive branch leading the charge.

Some money will be used to expand treatment to the poor and to young mothers.
This will offer the helping hand to the many innocent victims of drugs, like the
thousands of babies born addicted or with AIDS because of the mother's
addiction. Some will be used to cut the waiting time for treatment. Some money
will be devoted to those urban schools where the emergency is now the worst. And
much of it will be used to protect our borders, with help from the Coast Guard
and the Customs Service, the Departments of State and Justice, and, yes, the
U.S. military.

I mean to get tough on the drug criminals. And let me be clear: This President
will back up those who put their lives on the line every single day -- our local
police officers. My budget asks for beefed-up prosecution, for a new attack on
organized crime, and for enforcement of tough sentences -- and for the worst
kingpins, that means the death penalty. I also want to make sure that when a
drug dealer is convicted there's a cell waiting for him. And he should not go
free because prisons are too full. And so, let the word go out: If you're caught
and convicted, you will do time.

But for all we do in law enforcement, in interdiction and treatment, we will
never win this war on drugs unless we stop the demand for drugs. So, some of
this increase will be used to educate the young about the dangers of drugs. We
must involve the parents. We must involve the teachers. We must involve the
communities. And, my friends, we must involve ourselves, each and every one of
us in this concern.

One problem related to drug use demands our urgent attention and our continuing
compassion, and that is the terrible tragedy of AIDS. I'm asking for $1.6
billion for education to prevent the disease and for research to find a cure.

If we're to protect our future, we need a new attitude about the environment. We
must protect the air we breathe. I will send to you shortly legislation for a
new, more effective Clean Air Act. It will include a plan to reduce by date
certain the emissions which cause acid rain, because the time for study alone
has passed, and the time for action is now. We must make use of clean coal. My
budget contains full funding, on schedule, for the clean coal technology
agreement that we've made with Canada. We've made that agreement with Canada,
and we intend to honor that agreement. We must not neglect our parks. So, I'm
asking to fund new acquisitions under the Land and Water Conservation Fund. We
must protect our oceans. And I support new penalties against those who would
dump medical waste and other trash into our oceans. The age of the needle on the
beaches must end.

And in some cases, the gulfs and oceans off our shores hold the promise of oil
and gas reserves which can make our nation more secure and less dependent on
foreign oil. And when those with the most promise can be tapped safely, as with
much of the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge, we should proceed. But we must use
caution; we must respect the environment. And so, tonight I'm calling for the
indefinite postponement of three lease sales which have raised troubling
questions, two off the coast of California and one which could threaten the
Everglades in Florida. Action on these three lease sales will await the
conclusion of a special task force set up to measure the potential for
environmental damage.

I'm directing the Attorney General and the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency to use every tool at their disposal to speed and toughen the
enforcement of our laws against toxic-waste dumpers. I want faster cleanups and
tougher enforcement of penalties against polluters.

In addition to caring for our future, we must care for those around us. A decent
society shows compassion for the young, the elderly, the vulnerable, and the
poor. Our first obligation is to the most vulnerable -- infants, poor mothers,
children living in poverty -- and my proposed budget recognizes this. I ask for
full funding of Medicaid, an increase of over $3 billion, and an expansion of
the program to include coverage of pregnant women who are near the poverty line.
I believe we should help working families cope with the burden of child care.
Our help should be aimed at those who need it most: low-income families with
young children. I support a new child care tax credit that will aim our efforts
at exactly those families, without discriminating against mothers who choose to
stay at home.

Now, I know there are competing proposals. But remember this: The overwhelming
majority of all preschool child care is now provided by relatives and neighbors
and churches and community groups. Families who choose these options should
remain eligible for help. Parents should have choice. And for those children who
are unwanted or abused or whose parents are deceased, we should encourage
adoption. I propose to reenact the tax deduction for adoption expenses and to
double it to $3,000. Let's make it easier for these kids to have parents who
love them.

We have a moral contract with our senior citizens. And in this budget, Social
Security is fully funded, including a full cost-of-living adjustment. We must
honor our contract.

We must care about those in the shadow of life, and I, like many Americans, am
deeply troubled by the plight of the homeless. The causes of homelessness are
many; the history is long. But the moral imperative to act is clear. Thanks to
the deep well of generosity in this great land, many organizations already
contribute, but we in government cannot stand on the sidelines. In my budget, I
ask for greater support for emergency food and shelter, for health services and
measures to prevent substance abuse, and for clinics for the mentally ill. And I
propose a new initiative involving the full range of government agencies. We
must confront this national shame.

There's another issue that I've decided to mention here tonight. I've long
believed that the people of Puerto Rico should have the right to determine their
own political future. Personally, I strongly favor statehood. But I urge the
Congress to take the necessary steps to allow the people to decide in a
referendum.

Certain problems, the result of decades of unwise practices, threaten the health
and security of our people. Left unattended, they will only get worse. But we
can act now to put them behind us.

Earlier this week, I announced my support for a plan to restore the financial
and moral integrity of our savings system. I ask Congress to enact our reform
proposals within 45 days. We must not let this situation fester. We owe it to
the savers in this country to solve this problem. Certainly, the savings of
Americans must remain secure. Let me be clear: Insured depositors will continue
to be fully protected, but any plan to refinance the system must be accompanied
by major reform. Our proposals will prevent such a crisis from recurring. The
best answer is to make sure that a mess like this will never happen again. The
majority of thrifts in communities across the Nation have been honest. They've
played a major role in helping families achieve the dream of home ownership. But
make no mistake, those who are corrupt, those who break the law, must be kicked
out of the business; and they should go to jail.

We face a massive task in cleaning up the waste left from decades of
environmental neglect at America's nuclear weapons plants. Clearly, we must
modernize these plants and operate them safely. That's not at issue; our
national security depends on it. But beyond that, we must clean up the old mess
that's been left behind. And I propose in this budget to more than double our
current effort to do so. This will allow us to identify the exact nature of the
various problems so we can clean them up, and clean them up we will.

We've been fortunate during these past 8 years. America is a stronger nation
than it was in 1980. Morale in our Armed Forces has been restored; our resolve
has been shown. Our readiness has been improved, and we are at peace. There can
no longer be any doubt that peace has been made more secure through strength.
And when America is stronger, the world is safer.

Most people don't realize that after the successful restoration of our strength,
the Pentagon budget has actually been reduced in real terms for each of the last
4 years. We cannot tolerate continued real reduction in defense. In light of the
compelling need to reduce the deficit, however, I support a 1-year freeze in the
military budget, something I proposed last fall in my flexible freeze plan. And
this freeze will apply for only 1 year, and after that, increases above
inflation will be required. I will not sacrifice American preparedness, and I
will not compromise American strength.

I should be clear on the conditions attached to my recommendation for the coming
year: The savings must be allocated to those priorities for investing in our
future that I've spoken about tonight. This defense freeze must be a part of a
comprehensive budget agreement which meets the targets spelled out in
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law without raising taxes and which incorporates reforms
in the budget process.

I've directed the National Security Council to review our national security and
defense policies and report back to me within 90 days to ensure that our
capabilities and resources meet our commitments and strategies. I'm also
charging the Department of Defense with the task of developing a plan to improve
the defense procurement process and management of the Pentagon, one which will
fully implement the Packard commission report. Many of these changes can only be
made with the participation of the Congress, and so, I ask for your help. We
need fewer regulations. We need less bureaucracy. We need multiyear procurement
and 2-year budgeting. And frankly -- and don't take this wrong -- we need less
congressional micromanagement of our nation's military policy. I detect a slight
division on that question, but nevertheless -- (laughter).

Securing a more peaceful world is perhaps the most important priority I'd like
to address tonight. You know, we meet at a time of extraordinary hope. Never
before in this century have our values of freedom, democracy, and economic
opportunity been such a powerful and intellectual force around the globe. Never
before has our leadership been so crucial, because while America has its eyes on
the future, the world has its eyes on America.

And it's a time of great change in the world, and especially in the Soviet
Union. Prudence and common sense dictate that we try to understand the full
meaning of the change going on there, review our policies, and then proceed with
caution. But I've personally assured General Secretary Gorbachev that at the
conclusion of such a review we will be ready to move forward. We will not miss
any opportunity to work for peace. The fundamental facts remain that the Soviets
retain a very powerful military machine in the service of objectives which are
still too often in conflict with ours. So, let us take the new openness
seriously, but let's also be realistic. And let's always be strong.

There are some pressing issues we must address. I will vigorously pursue the
Strategic Defense Initiative. The spread, and even use, of sophisticated
weaponry threatens global security as never before. Chemical weapons must be
banned from the face of the Earth, never to be used again. And look, this won't
be easy. Verification -- extraordinarily difficult, but civilization and human
decency demand that we try. And the spread of nuclear weapons must be stopped.
And I'll work to strengthen the hand of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Our diplomacy must work every day against the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

And around the globe, we must continue to be freedom's best friend. And we must
stand firm for self-determination and democracy in Central America, including in
Nicaragua. It is my strongly held conviction that when people are given the
chance they inevitably will choose a free press, freedom of worship, and
certifiably free and fair elections.

We must strengthen the alliance of the industrial democracies, as solid a force
for peace as the world has ever known. And this is an alliance forged by the
power of our ideals, not the pettiness of our differences. So, let's lift our
sights to rise above fighting about beef hormones, to building a better future,
to move from protectionism to progress.

I've asked the Secretary of State to visit Europe next week and to consult with
our allies on the wide range of challenges and opportunities we face together,
including East-West relations. And I look forward to meeting with our NATO
partners in the near future.

And I, too, shall begin a trip shortly to the far reaches of the Pacific Basin,
where the winds of democracy are creating new hope and the power of free markets
is unleashing a new force. When I served as our representative in China 14 or 15
years ago, few would have predicted the scope of the changes we've witnessed
since then. But in preparing for this trip, I was struck by something I came
across from a Chinese writer. He was speaking of his country, decades ago, but
his words speak to each of us in America tonight. "Today," he said, "we're
afraid of the simple words like goodness' and mercy' and kindness."' My
friends, if we're to succeed as a nation, we must rediscover those words.

In just 3 days, we mark the birthday of Abraham Lincoln, the man who saved our
Union and gave new meaning to the word "opportunity." Lincoln once said: "I hold
that while man exists, it is his duty to improve not only his own condition but
to assist in ameliorating that of mankind." It is this broader mission to which
I call all Americans, because the definition of a successful life must include
serving others.

And to the young people of America, who sometimes feel left out, I ask you
tonight to give us the benefit of your talent and energy through a new program
called YES, for Youth Entering Service to America.

To those men and women in business, remember the ultimate end of your work: to
make a better product, to create better lives. I ask you to plan for the longer
term and avoid that temptation of quick and easy paper profits.

To the brave men and women who wear the uniform of the United States of America,
thank you. Your calling is a high one: to be the defenders of freedom and the
guarantors of liberty. And I want you to know that this nation is grateful for
your service.

To the farmers of America, we appreciate the bounty you provide. We will work
with you to open foreign markets to American agricultural products.

And to the parents of America, I ask you to get involved in your child's
schooling. Check on the homework, go to the school, meet the teachers, care
about what is happening there. It's not only your child's future on the line,
it's America's.

To kids in our cities, don't give up hope. Say no to drugs; stay in school. And,
yes, "Keep hope alive."

To those 37 million Americans with some form of disability, you belong in the
economic mainstream. We need your talents in America's work force. Disabled
Americans must become full partners in America's opportunity society.

To the families of America watching tonight in your living rooms, hold fast to
your dreams because ultimately America's future rests in your hands.

And to my friends in this Chamber, I ask your cooperation to keep America
growing while cutting the deficit. That's only fair to those who now have no
vote: the generations to come. Let them look back and say that we had the
foresight to understand that a time of peace and prosperity is not the time to
rest but a time to press forward, a time to invest in the future.

And let all Americans remember that no problem of human making is too great to
be overcome by human ingenuity, human energy, and the untiring hope of the human
spirit. I believe this. I would not have asked to be your President if I didn't.
And tomorrow the debate on the plan I've put forward begins, and I ask the
Congress to come forward with your own proposals. Let's not question each
other's motives. Let's debate, let's negotiate; but let us solve the problem.

Recalling anniversaries may not be my specialty in speeches -- (laughter) -- but
tonight is one of some note. On February 9th, 1941, just 48 years ago tonight,
Sir Winston Churchill took to the airwaves during Britain's hour of peril. He'd
received from President Roosevelt a hand-carried letter quoting Longfellow's
famous poem: "Sail on, O Ship of State! Sail on, O Union, strong and great!
Humanity with all its fears, With all the hopes of future years, Is hanging
breathless on thy fate!" And Churchill responded on this night by radio
broadcast to a nation at war, but he directed his words to Franklin Roosevelt.
"We shall not fail or falter," he said. "We shall not weaken or tire. Give us
the tools, and we will finish the job."

Tonight, almost half a century later, our peril may be less immediate, but the
need for perseverance and clear-sighted fortitude is just as great. Now, as
then, there are those who say it can't be done. There are voices who say that
America's best days have passed, that we're bound by constraints, threatened by
problems, surrounded by troubles which limit our ability to hope. Well, tonight
I remain full of hope. We Americans have only begun on our mission of goodness
and greatness. And to those timid souls, I repeat the plea: "Give us the tools,
and we will do the job."

Thank you. God bless you, and God bless America.
Tonight, I come not to speak about the "State of the Government", not to
detail every new initiative we plan for the coming year, nor describe every
line in the budget. I'm here to speak to you and to the American people
about the State of the Union about our world, the changes we've seen, the
challenges we face. And what that means for America.

There are singular moments in history, dates that divide all that goes
before from all that comes after. And many of us in this chamber have lived
much of our lives in a world whose fundamental features were defined in
1945. And the events of that year decreed the shape of nations, the pace of
progress, freedom or oppression for millions of people around the world.

Nineteen Forty-Five provided the common frame of reference the compass
points of the postwar era we've relied upon to understand ourselves. And
that was our world until now. The events of the year just ended, the
Revolution of '89, have been a chain reaction, changes so striking that it
marks the beginning of a new era in the world's affairs.

Think back think back just twelve short months ago to the world we knew as
1989 began.

One year, one year ago the people of Panama lived in fear under the thumb
of a dictator. Today democracy is restored. Panama is free.

"Operation Just Cause" has achieved its objective. And the number of
military personel in Panama is now very close to what it was before the
operation began. And tonight I am announcing that before the end of
February the additional numbers of American troops, the brave men and women
of our armed forces who made this mission a success, will be back home.

A year ago in Poland, Lech Walesa declared he was ready to open a dialogue
with the Communist rulers of that country. And today, with the future of a
free Poland in their own hands, members of Solidarity lead the Polish
government.

And a year ago, freedom's playwright, Vaclav Havel, languished as a
prisoner in Prague. And today it's Vaclav Havel, President of
Czechoslovakia.

And one year ago Erich Honecker of East Germany claimed history as his
guide. He predicted the Berlin Wall would last another hundred years. And
today, less than one year later, it's the wall that's history.

Remarkable events, remarkable events, events that fulfill the long-held
hopes of the American people. Events that validate the longstanding goals
of American policy, a policy based upon a single shining principle: the
cause of freedom.

America, not just the nation, but an idea alive in the minds of the people,
everywhere. As this new world takes shape, America stands at the center of
a widening circle of freedom, today, tomorrow and into the next century.

Our nation is the enduring dream of every immigrant who ever set foot on
these shores, and the millions still struggling to be free. This nation,
this idea called America was and always will be a new world, our new
world.

At a workers' rally in a place called Branik on the outskirts of Prague the
idea called America is alive. A worker, dressed in grimy overalls, rises to
speak at the factory gates. And he begins his speech to his fellow citizens
with these words, words of a distant revolution: "We hold these truths to
be self-evident. That all men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their creator with certain unalienable rights, and that among these are
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." It's no secret here at home
freedom's door opened long ago. The cornerstones of this free society have
already been set in place: democracy, competition, opportunity, private
investment, stewardship, and of course, leadership.

And our challenge today is to take this democratic system of ours, a system
second to none, and make it better:

A better America where there's a job for whoever wants one;

Where women working outside the home can be confident their children are
in safe and loving care, and where Government works to expand child
alternatives for parents.

Where we reconcile the needs of a clean environment and a strong economy.

Where "Made in the USA" is recognized around the world as the symbol of
quality and progress,

And where every one of us enjoys the same opportunities to live, to work
and to contribute to society. And where, for the first time, the American
mainstream includes all of our disabled citizens.

Where everyone has a roof over his head, and where the homeless get the
help they need to live in dignity.

Where our schools challenge and support our kids and our teachers, and
every one of them makes the grade,

Where every street, every city, every school and every child is drug-free.

And finally, and finally, where no American is forgotten. Our hearts go out
to our hostages, our hostages who are ceaselessly in our minds and in our
efforts. That's part of the future we want to see, the future we can make
for ourselves. But dreams alone won't get us there. We need to extend our
horizon, to commit to the long view. And our mission for the future starts
today.

In the tough competitive markets around the world, America faces the great
challenges and great opportunities. And we know that we can succeed in the
global economic arena of the 90's. But to meet that challenge we must make
some fundamental changes, some crucial investments in ourselves.

Yes, we are going to invest in America. This Administration is determined
to encourage the creation of capital, capital of all kinds. Physical
capital: everything from our farms and factories to our workshops and
production lines, all that is needed to produce and deliver quality goods
and quality services. Intellectual, intellectual capital: the source of
ideas that spark tomorrow's products. And of course human capital: the
talented work force that we'll need to compete in the global market.

And let me tell you, if we ignore human capital, if we lose the spirit of
American ingenuity, the sprit that is the hallmark of the AMERICAN worker,
that would be bad. The American worker is the most productive worker in the
world.

We need to save more. We need to expand the pool of capital for new
investments that mean more jobs and more growth. And that's the idea behind
the new initiative I call the Family Savings Plan, which I will send to
Congress tomorrow.

We need to cut the tax on capital gains, encourage, encourage risk-takers,
especially those in small businesses, to take those steps that translate
into economic reward, jobs, and a better life for all of us.

We'll do what it takes to invest in America's future. The budget commitment
is there. The money is there. It's there for research and development, R
and D, a record high. It's there for our housing initiative, hope, H-O-P-E,
to help everyone from first-time homebuyers to the homeless. The money's
there to keep our kids drug-free, 70 percent more than when I took office
in 1989. It's there for space exploration, and its there for education,
another record high.

And one more, and one more thing. Last fall at the education summit, the
governors and I agreed to look for ways to help make sure that our kids are
ready to learn the very first day they walk into the classroom. And I've
made good on that commitment by proposing a record increase in funds, an
extra half billion dollars, for something near and dear to all of us: Head
Start.

Education is the one investment that means more for our future, because it
means the most for our children. Real improvement in our schools is not
simply a matter of spending more. It's a matter of asking more, expecting
more, of our schools, our teachers, of our kids, of our parents and of
ourselves. And that's why tonight, and that's why tonight, I am announcing
America's education goals, goals developed with enormous cooperation from
the nation's governors. And if I might I'd like to say I'm very pleased
that Governor Gardner and Governor Clinton, Governor Branstad, Governor
Campbell, all of whom were very key in these discussion, these
deliberations, are with us here tonight.

By the, by the year 2000, every child must start school ready to learn. The
United States must increase the high school graduation rate to no less than
90 percent. And we are going to make sure our schools' diplomas mean
something. In critical subjects, at the fourth, eighth, and 12th grades, we
must assess our students' performance.

By the, by the year 2000 U.S. students must be the first in the world in
math and science achievement. Every American adult must be a skilled,
literate worker and citizen. Every school must offer the kind of
disciplined environment that makes it possible for our kids to learn. And
every school in America must be drug-free.

Ambitious aims? Of course. Easy to do? Far from it. But the future's at
stake. The nation will not accept anything less than excellence in
education.

These investments will help keep America competitive. And I know this about
the American people: we welcome competition. We'll match our ingenuity, our
energy, our experience, and technology our spirit and enterprise against
anyone. But let the competition be free, but let it also be fair. America
is ready.

Since we really mean it, and since we're serious about being ready to meet
our challenge, we're getting our own house in order. We have made real
progress. Seven years ago, the Federal deficit was 6 percent of our gross
national product, 6 percent. In the new budget I sent up two days ago the
deficit is down to 1 percent of GNP.

That budget brings Federal spending under control. It meets the
Gramm-Rudman target. It brings the deficit down further. And balances the
budget by 1993, with no new taxes.

And let me tell you, there's still more than enough Federal spending. For
most of us, $1.2 trillion is still a lot of money.

And once the budget is balanced, we can operate the way every family must
when it has bills to pay. We won't leave it to our children and
grandchildren. Once it's balanced, we will start paying off the national
debt.

And there's something more, and there's something more we owe the
generations of the future: stewardship, the safekeeping of America's
precious environmental inheritance.

As just one sign of how serious we are, we will elevate the Environmental
Protection Agency to Cabinet rank. Not, not more bureaucracy, not more red
tape, but the certainty that here at home, and especially in our dealings
with other nations, environmental issues have the status they deserve.

This year's budget provides over $2 billion in new spending to protect our
environment, with over $1 billion for global change research, and a new
initiative I call America the Beautiful to expand our national parks and
wildlife preserves and improve recreational facilities on public lands.

And something else, something that will help keep this country clean, from
our forest land to the inner cities, and keep America beautiful for
generations to come, the money to plant a billion trees a year.

And tonight, and tonight let me say again to all the members of the
Congress, the American people did not send us here to bicker. There is work
to do, and they sent us here to get it done. And once again, in the spirit
of cooperation I offer my hand to all of you. And let's work together to do
the will of the people--clean air, child care, the educational excellence
act, crime and drugs. It's time to act. The farm bill, transportation
policy, product liability reform, enterprise zones. It's time to act
together.

And there's one thing I hope we can agree on. It's about our commitments.
And I'm talking about Social Security.

To every American out there on Social Security, to every, every American
supporting that system today, and to everyone counting on it when they
retire, we made a promise to you, and we are going to keep it.

We, we rescued the system in 1983 and it's sound again, bipartisan
arrangement. Our budget fully funds today's benefits and it assures that
future benefits will be funded as well. And the last thing we need to do is
mess around with Social Security.

There's one more problem we need to address. We must give careful
consideration to the recommendations of the health care studies under way
now. And that's why tonight, I am asking Dr. Sullivan, Lou Sullivan,
Secretary of Health and Human Services, to lead a Domestic Policy Council
review of recommendations on the quality, accessibility and cost of our
nation's health care system. I am committed to bring the staggering costs
of health care under control.

The State of the Government does indeed depend on many of us in this very
chamber. But the State of the Union depends on all Americans. We must
maintain the democratic decency that makes a nation out of millions of
individuals. And I've been appalled at the recent mail bombings across this
country. Every one of us must confront and condemn racism, anti-Semitism,
bigotry and hate. Not next week, not tomorrow, but right now. Every single
one of us.

The State of the Union depends on whether we help our neighbor, claim the
problems of our community as our own. We've got to step forward when
there's trouble, lend a hand, be what I call a point of light to a stranger
in need. We've got to take the time after a busy day to sit down and read
with our kids, help them with their homework, pass along the values we had
as children. And that's how we sustain the State of the Union.

Every effort is important. It all adds up. It's doing the things that give
democracy meaning. It all adds up to who we are and who we will be.

And let me say, that so long as we remember the American idea, so long as
we live up to the American ideal, the State of the Union will remain sound
and strong.

And to those who worry that we've lost our way, well, I want you to listen
to parts of a letter written by James Markwell, Pvt. 1st Class James
Markwell, a 20-year-old Army medic to the First Battalion, 75th Rangers.
It's dated Dec. 18, the day before our armed forces went into action in
Panama. It's a letter servicemen write--and hope will never, ever be sent.
And sadly, Private Markwell's mother did receive this letter. She passed it
on to me out there in Cincinnati.

And here is some of what he wrote: "I've never been afraid of death, but I
know he is waiting at the corner...I've been trained to kill and to save,
and so has everyone else. I am frightened of what lays beyond the fog, and
yet... do not mourn for me. Revel in the life that I have died to give
you... But most of all, don't forget that the Army was my choice. Something
that I wanted to do. Remember I joined the Army to serve my country and
inure that you are free to do what you want and to live your lives
freely."

Let me add that Private Markwell was among the first to see battle in
Panama, and among the first to fall. But he knew what he believed in. He
carried the idea we call America in his heart.

I began tonight speaking about the changes we've seen this past year. There
is a new world of challenges and opportunities before us. And there is a
need for leadership that only America can provide.

Nearly 40 years ago, in his last address to the Congress, President Harry
Truman predicted such a time would come. He said, "As our world grows
stronger, more united, more attractive to men on both sides of the Iron
Curtain, then inevitably there will come a time of change within the
Communist world." Today, that change is taking place.

For more than 40 years, America and its allies held Communism in check and
insured that democracy would continue to exist. And today, with Communism
crumbling, our aim must be to insure democracy's advance, to take the lead
in forging peace and freedom's best hope, a great and growing commonwealth
of free nations.

And to the Congress and to all Americans, I say it is time to acclaim a new
consensus at home and abroad, a common vision of the peaceful world we want
to see.

Here in our own hemisphere it is time for all the people of the Americas,
North and South, to live in freedom.

In the Far East and Africa, it's time for the full flowering of free
governments and free markets that have served the engine of progress.

It is time to offer our hand to the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe
so that continent, for too long a continent divided, can see a future whole
and free.

It's time to build on our new relationship with the Soviet Union, to
endorse and encourage a peaceful process of internal change toward
democracy and economic opportunity.

We are in a period of great transition, great hope, and yet great
uncertainty. We recognize that the Soviet military threat in Europe is
diminishing, but we see little change in Soviet strategic modernization.
And, therefore, we must sustain our own strategic offense modernization and
the Strategic Defense Initiative.

But the time is right to move forward on a conventional arms control
agreement to move us to more appropriate levels of military forces in
Europe, a coherent defense program that insures the U.S. will continue to
be a catalyst for peaceful change in Europe. And I've consulted with
leaders of NATO. In fact I spoke by phone with President Gorbachev just
today.

And I agree with our European allies that an American military presence in
Europe is essential and that it should not be solely tied to the Soviet
military presence in Eastern Europe.

But our troop levels can still be lower. And so tonight I am announcing a
major new step for a further reduction in U.S. and Soviet manpower in
Central and Eastern Europe to 195,000 on each side.

This number, this number, this level, reflects the advice of our senior
military advisers. It's designed to protect American and European interests
and sustain NATO's defense strategy. A swift conclusion to our arms control
talks--conventional, chemical and strategic--must now be our goal. And
that time has come.

Still, we must recognize an unfortunate fact: in many regions of the world
tonight the reality is conflict, not peace. Enduring animosities and
opposing interests remain. And thus the cause of peace must be served by an
America strong enough and sure enough to defend our interests and our
ideals. It's this American idea that for the past four decades helped
inspire the Revolution of '89.

And here at home, and in the world, there is history in the making, and
history to be made. Six months ago, early in this season of change, I stood
at the gates of the Gdansk shipyard in Poland at the monument to the fallen
workers of Solidarity. It's a monument of simple majesty. Three tall
crosses rise up from the stones, and atop each cross, an anchor, an ancient
symbol of hope.

The anchor in our world today is freedom. Holding us steady in times of
change, a symbol of hope to all the world. And freedom is at the very heart
of the idea that is America. Giving life to the idea depends on every one
of us. Our anchor has always been faith and family.

In the last few days of this past monumentous year, our family was blessed
once more, celebrating the joy of life when a little boy became our 12th
grandchild. When I held the little guy for the first time, the troubles at
home and abroad seemed manageable, and totally in perspective.

And now I know, I know you're probably thinking, Well, that's just a
grandfather talking.

Well, maybe you're right. But I've met a lot of children this past year
across this country, as all of you have. Everywhere from the Far East to
Eastern Europe. All kids are unique. Yet, all kids are alike. The budding
young environmentalist I met this month, who joined me in exploring the
Florida Everglades. The Little Leaguers I played catch with in Poland,
ready to go from Warsaw to the World Series. And even the kids who are ill
or alone--and God bless those boarder babies, born addicted to drugs and
AIDS--coping with problems no child should have to face. But, you know,
when it comes to hope and the future, every kid is the same: full of
dreams, ready to take on the world, all special because they are the very
future of freedom. And to them belongs this new world I've been speaking
about.

And so tonight, I'm going to ask something of every one of you. Now let me
start with my generation, with the grandparents out there. You are our
living link with the past. Tell your grandchildren the story of struggles
waged at home and abroad, of sacrifices freely made for freedom's sake. And
tell them your own story as well, because every American has a story to
tell.

And parents, your children look to you for direction and guidance. Tell
them of faith and family. Tell them we are one nation under God. Teach them
that of all the many gifts they can receive, liberty is their most precious
legacy. And of all the gifts they can give, the greatest, the greatest is
helping others.

And to the children and young people out there tonight, with you rests our
hope, all that America will mean in the years and decades ahead. Fix your
vision on a new century, your century, on dreams we cannot see, on the
destiny that is yours and yours alone.

And finally, let all Americans, all of us here in this chamber, the
symbolic center of democracy, affirm our allegiance to this idea we call
America. And let us remember that the State of the Union depends upon each
and every one of us.

God bless all of you. And may God bless this great nation, the United
States of America.
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, members of the United States Congress.

I come to this house of the people to speak to you and all Americans,
certain we stand at a defining hour.

Halfway around the world, we are engaged in a great struggle in the skies
and on the seas and sands. We know why we're there. We are Americans--part
of something larger than ourselves.

For two centuries we've done the hard work of freedom. And tonight we lead
the world in facing down a threat to decency and humanity.

What is at stake is more than one small country, it is a big idea--a new
world order, where diverse nations are drawn together in common cause to
achieve the universal aspirations of mankind: peace and security, freedom,
and the rule of law. Such is a world worthy of our struggle, and worthy of
our children's future.

The community of nations has resolutely gathered to condemn and repel
lawless aggression. Saddam Hussein's unprovoked invasion--his ruthless,
systematic rape of a peaceful neighbor--violated everything the community
of nations holds dear. The world has said this aggression would not stand,
and it will not stand.

Together, we have resisted the trap of appeasement, cynicism and isolation
that gives temptation to tyrants. The world has answered Saddam's invasion
with 12 United Nations resolutions, starting with a demand for Iraq's
immediate and unconditional withdrawal, and backed up by forces from 28
countries of six continents. With few exceptions, the world now stands as
one.

The end of the cold war has been a victory for all humanity. A year and a
half ago, in Germany, I said our goal was a Europe whole and free. Tonight,
Germany is united. Europe has become whole and free, and America's
leadership was instrumental in making it possible.

The principle that has guided us is simple: our objective is to help the
Baltic peoples achieve their aspirations, not to punish the Soviet Union.
In our recent discussions with the Soviet leadership we have been given
representations, which, if fulfilled, would result in the withdrawal of
some Soviet forces, a re-opening of dialogue with the republics, and a move
away from violence.

We will watch carefully as the situation develops. And we will maintain our
contact with the Soviet leadership to encourage continued commitment to
democratization and reform.

If it is possible, I want to continue to build a lasting basis for
U.S.-Soviet cooperation, for a more peaceful future for all mankind.

The triumph of democratic ideas in Eastern Europe and Latin America, and
the continuing struggle for freedom elsewhere around the world all confirm
the wisdom of our nation's founders.

Tonight, we work to achieve another victory, a victory over tyranny and
savage aggression.

We in this Union enter the last decade of the 20th Century thankful for all
our blessings, steadfast in our purpose, aware of our difficulties and
responsive to our duties at home and around the world.

For two centuries, America has served the world as an inspiring example of
freedom and democracy. For generations, America has led the struggle to
preserve and extend the blessings of liberty. And today, in a rapidly
changing world, American leadership is indispensable. Americans know that
leadership brings burdens, and requires sacrifice.

But we also know why the hopes of humanity turn to us. We are Americans; we
have a unique responsibility to do the hard work of freedom. And when we
do, freedom works.

The conviction and courage we see in the Persian Gulf today is simply the
American character in action. The indomitable spirit that is contributing
to this victory for world peace and justice is the same spirit that gives
us the power and the potential to meet our challenges at home.

We are resolute and resourceful. If we can selflessly confront evil for the
sake of good in a land so far away, then surely we can make this land all
it should be.

If anyone tells you America's best days are behind her, they're looking the
wrong way.

Tonight, I come before this house, and the American people, with an appeal
for renewal. This is not merely a call for new government initiatives, it
is a call for new initiative in government, in our communities, and from
every American--to prepare for the next American century.

America has always led by example. So who among us will set this example?
Which of our citizens will lead us in this next American century? Everyone
who steps forward today, to get one addict off drugs; to convince one
troubled teen-ager not to give up on life; to comfort one AIDS patient; to
help one hungry child.

We have within our reach the promise of renewed America. We can find
meaning and reward by serving some purpose higher than ourselves--a
shining purpose, the illumination of a thousand points of light. It is
expressed by all who know the irresistible force of a child's hand, of a
friend who stands by you and stays there--a volunteer's generous gesture,
an idea that is simply right.

The problems before us may be different, but the key to solving them
remains the same: it is the individual--the individual who steps forward.
And the state of our Union is the union of each of us, one to the other:
the sum of our friendships, marriages, families and communities.

We all have something to give. So if you know how to read, find someone who
can't. If you've got a hammer, find a nail. If you're not hungry, not
lonely, not in trouble--seek out someone who is.

Join the community of conscience. Do the hard work of freedom. That will
define the state of our Union.

Since the birth of our nation, "we the people" has been the source of our
strength. What government can do alone is limited, but the potential of the
American people knows no limits.

We are a nation of rock-solid realism and clear-eyed idealism. We are
Americans. We are the nation that believes in the future. We are the nation
that can shape the future.

And we've begun to do just that, by strengthening the power and choice of
individuals and families.

Together, these last two years, we've put dollars for child care directly
in the hands of patients instead of bureaucracies, unshackled the potential
of Americans with disabilities, applied the creativity of the marketplace in
the service of the environment, for clean air, and made homeownership
possible for more Americans.

The strength of a democracy is not in bureaucracy, it is in the people and
their communities. In everything we do, let us unleash the potential of our
most precious resource--our citizens. We must return to families,
communities, counties, cities, states and institutions of every kind, the
power to chart their own destiny, and the freedom and opportunity provided
by strong economic growth. That's what America is all about.

I know, tonight, in some regions of our country, people are in genuine
economic distress. I hear them.

Earlier this month Kathy Blackwell of Massachusetts wrote me about what can
happen when the economy slows down, saying, "My heart is aching, and I
think that you should know--your people out here are hurting badly."

I understand. And I'm not unrealistic about the future. But there are
reasons to be optimistic about our economy.

First, we don't have to fight double-digit inflation. Second, most
industries won't have to make big cuts in production because they don't
have big inventories piled up. And third, our exports are running solid and
strong. In fact, American businesses are exporting at a record rate.

So let's put these times in perspective. Together, since 1981, we've
created almost 20 million jobs, cut inflation in half and cut interest
rates in half.

Yes, the largest peacetime economic expansion in history has been
temporarily interrupted. But our economy is still over twice as large as
our closest competitor.

We will get this recession behind us and return to growth soon. We will get
on our way to a new record of expansion, and achieve the competitive
strength that will carry us into the next American century.

We should focus our efforts today on encouraging economic growth, investing
in the future and giving power and opportunity to the individual.

We must begin with control of Federal spending. That's why I'm submitting a
budget that holds the growth in spending to less than the rate of
inflation. And that's why, amid all the sound and fury of last year's
budget debate, we put into law new, enforceable spending caps so that
future spending debates will mean a battle of ideas, not a bidding war.

Though controversial, the budget agreement finally put the Federal
Government on a pay-as-you-go basis, and cut the growth of debt by nearly
$500 billion. And that frees funds for saving and job-creating investment.

Now, let's do more. My budget again includes tax-free family savings
accounts; penalty-free withdrawals from I. R. A.'s for first-time
homebuyers; and, to increase jobs and growth, a reduced tax for long-term
capital gains.

I know their are differences among us about the impact and the effects of a
capital gains incentive. So tonight I am asking the Congressional leaders
and the Federal Reserve to cooperate with us in a study, led by Chairman
Alan Greenspan, to sort out our technical differences so that we can avoid
a return to unproductive partisan bickering.

But just as our efforts will bring economic growth now and in the future,
they must also be matched by long-term investments for the next American
century.

That requires a forward-looking plan of action, and that's exactly what we
will be sending to the Congress. We have prepared a detailed series of
proposals, that include: A budget that promotes investment in America's
future--in children, education, infrastructure, space and high technology.
Legislation to achieve excellence in education, building on the partnership
forged with the 50 governors at the education summit, enabling parents to
choose their children's schools and helping to make America No. 1 in math
and science. A blueprint for a new national highway system, a critical
investment in our transportation infrastructure. A research and development
agenda that includes record levels of Federal investment and a permanent
tax credit to strengthen private R and D and create jobs. A comprehensive
national energy strategy that calls for energy conservation and efficiency,
increased development and greater use of alternative fuels. A banking
reform plan to bring America's financial system into the 21st Century, so
that our banks remain safe and secure and can continue to make job-creating
loans for our factories, businesses, and homebuyers. I do think there has
been too much pessimism. Sound banks should be making more sound loans,
now. And interest rates should be lower, now. In addition to these
proposals, we must recognize that our economic strength depends upon being
competitive in world markets. We must continue to expand America's exports.
A successful Uruguay Round of world trade negotiations will create more
real jobs, and more real growth, for all nations. You and I know that if
the playing field is level, America's workers and farmers can outwork and
outproduce anyone, anytime, anywhere.

And with the Mexican free trade agreement and our Enterprise for the
Americas Initiative we can help our partners strengthen their economies and
move toward a free trade zone throughout this entire hemisphere.

The budget also includes a plan of action right here at home to put more
power and opportunity in the hands of the individual. That means new
incentives to create jobs in our inner cities by encouraging investment
through enterprise zones. It also means tenant control and ownership of
public housing. Freedom and the power to choose should not be the privilege
of wealth. They are the birthright of every American.

Civil rights are also crucial to protecting equal opportunity. Every one of
us has a responsibility to speak out against racism, bigotry, and hate. We
will continue our vigorous enforcement of existing statutes, and I will once
again press the Congress to strengthen the laws against employment
discrimination without resorting to the use of unfair preferences.

We're determined to protect another fundamental civil right: freedom from
crime and the fear that stalks our cities. The Attorney General will soon
convene a crime summit of the nation's law-enforcement officials. And to
help us support them we need a tough crime control legislation, and we need
it now.

As we fight crime, we will fully implement our nation strategy for
combatting drug abuse. Recent data show we are making progress, but much
remains to be done. We will not rest until the day of the dealer is over,
forever.

Good health care is every American's right and every American's
responsibility. So we are proposing an aggression program of new prevention
initiatives--for infants, for children, for adults, and for the elderly--
to promote a healthier America and to help keep costs from spiraling.

It's time to give people more choice in government by reviving the ideal of
the citizen politician who comes not to stay, but to serve. One of the
reasons there is so much support for term limitations is that the American
people are increasingly concerned about big-money influence in politics.
We must look beyond the next election, to the next generation. The time has
come to put the national interest ahead of the special interest--and
totally eliminate political action committees.

That would truly put more competition in elections and more power in the
hands of individuals. And where power cannot be put directly into the hands
of the individual, it should be moved closer to the people--away from
Washington.

The federal government too often treats government programs as if they are
of Washington, by Washington, and for Washington. Once established, federal
programs seem to become immortal.

It's time for a more dynamic program life cycle. Some programs should
increase. Some should decrease. Some should be terminated. And some should
be consolidated and turned over to the states.

My budget includes a list of programs for potential turnover totaling more
than $20 billion. Working with Congress and the governors, I propose we
select at least $15 billion in such programs and turn them over to the
states in a single consolidated grant, fully funded, for flexible
management by the states.

The value of this turnover approach is straightforward. It allows the
Federal Government to reduce overhead. It allows states to manage more
flexibly and more efficiently. It moves power and decision-making closer to
the people. And it re-enforces a theme of this Administration: appreciation
and encouragement of the innovative power of "states as laboratories."

This nation was founded by leaders who understood that power belongs in the
hands of the people. They planned for the future. And so must we--here and
around the world.

As Americans, we know there are times when we must step forward and accept
our responsibility to lead the world away from the dark chaos of dictators,
toward the bright promise of a better day.

Almost 50 years ago, we began a long struggle against aggressive
totalitarianism. Now we face another defining hour for America and the
world.

There is no one more devoted, more committed to the hard work of freedom,
than every soldier and sailor, every marine, airman and coastguardsman--
every man and every woman now serving in the Persian Gulf.

Each of them has volunteered to provide for this nation's defense. And now
they bravely struggle to earn for America and for the world and for future
generations, a just and lasting peace.

Our commitment to them must be equal of their commitment to our country.
They are truly America's finest.

The war in the gulf is not a war we wanted. We worked hard to avoid war.
For more than five months we, along with the Arab League, the European
Community and the United Nations, tried every diplomatic avenue. U.N.
Secretary General Perez de Cuellar; Presidents Gorbachev, Mitterand, Ozal,
Mubarak, and Bendjedid; Kings Fahd and Hassan; Prime Ministers Major and
Andreotti--just to name a few--all worked for a solution. But time and
again Saddam Hussein flatly rejected the path of diplomacy and peace.

The world well knows how this conflict began, and when: it began on August
2nd, when Saddam invaded and sacked a small, defenseless neighbor. And I am
certain of how it will end. So that peace can prevail, we will prevail.

Tonight I'm pleased to report that we are on course. Iraq's capacity to
sustain war is being destroyed. Our investment, our training, our planning
--all are paying off. Time will not be Saddam's salvation.

Our purpose in the Persian Gulf remains constant: to drive Iraq out from
Kuwait, to restore Kuwait's legitimate government, and to insure the
stability and security of this critical region.

Let me make clear what I mean by the region's stability and security. We do
not seek the destruction of Iraq, its culture or its people. Rather, we
seek an Iraq that uses its great resources not to destroy, not to serve the
ambitions of a tyrant, but to build a better life for itself and its
neighbors. We seek a Persian Gulf where conflict is no longer the rule,
where the strong are neither tempted nor able to intimidate the weak.

Most Americans know instinctively why we are in the Gulf. They know we had
to stop Saddam now, not later. They know this brutal dictator will do
anything, will use any weapon, will commit any outrage, no matter how many
innocents must suffer.

They know we must make sure that control of the world's oil resources does
not fall into his hands only to finance further aggression. They know that
we need to build a new, enduring peace--based not on arms races and
confrontation, but on shared principles and the rule of law.

And we all realize that our responsibility to be the catalyst for peace in
the region does not end with the successful conclusion of this war.

Democracy brings the undeniable value of thoughtful dissent, and we have
heard some dissenting voices here at home, some reckless, most responsible.
But the fact the all the voices have the right to speak out is one of the
reasons we've been united in principle and purpose for 200 years.

Our progress in this great struggle is the result of years of vigilance and
a steadfast commitment to a strong defense. Now, with remarkable
technological advances like the Patriot missile, we can defend the
ballistic missile attacks aimed at innocent civilians.

Looking forward, I have directed that the S.D.I. program be refocused on
providing protection from limited ballistic missile strikes, whatever their
source. Let us pursue an S.D.I. program that can deal with any future
threat to the United States, to our forces overseas and to our friends and
allies.

The quality of American technology, thanks to the American worker, has
enabled us to successfully deal with difficult military conditions, and
help minimize the loss of life. We have given our men and women the very
best. And they deserve it.

We all have a special place in our hearts for the families of men and women
serving in the Gulf. They are represented here tonight, by Mrs. Norman
Schwarzkopf, and to all those serving with him. And to the families, let me
say, our forces in the gulf will not stay there one day longer than is
necessary to complete their mission.

The courage and success of the R.A.F. pilots--of the Kuwaiti, Saudi,
French, Canadians, Italians, the pilots of Qatar and Bahrain--all are
proof that for the first time since World War II, the international
community is united. The leadership of the United Nations, once only a
hoped-for ideal, is now confirming its founders' vision.

I am heartened that we are not being asked to bear alone the financial
burden of this struggle. Last year, our friends and allies provided the
bulk of the economic costs of Desert Shield, and having now received
commitments of over $40 billion for the first three months of 1991, I am
confident they will do no less as we move through Desert Storm.

But the world has to wonder what the dictator of Iraq is thinking. If he
thinks that by targeting innocent civilians in Israel and Saudi Arabia,
that he will gain an advantage--he is dead wrong. If he thinks that he
will advance his cause through tragic and despicable environmental
terrorism--he is dead wrong. And if he thinks that by abusing coalition
P.O.W.s, he will benefit--he is dead wrong.

We will succeed in the Gulf. And when we do, the world community will have
sent an enduring warning to any dictator or despot, present or future, who
contemplates outlaw aggression.

The world can therefore seize this opportunity to fulfill the long-held
promise of a new world order--where brutality will go unrewarded, and
aggression will meet collective resistance.

Yes, the United States bears a major share of leadership in this effort.
Among the nations of the world, only the United States of America has had
both the moral standing, and the means to back it up. We are the only
nation on this earth that could assemble the forces of peace.

This is the burden of leadership--and the strength that has made America
the beacon of freedom in a searching world.

This nation has never found glory in war. Our people have never wanted to
abandon the blessings of home and work, for distant lands and deadly
conflict. If we fight in anger, it is only because we have to fight at all.
And all of us yearn for a world where we will never have to fight again.

Each of us will measure, within ourselves, the value of this great
struggle. Any cost in lives is beyond our power to measure. But the cost of
closing our eyes to aggression is beyond mankind's power to imagine.

This we do know: Our cause is just. Our cause is moral. Our cause is
right.

Let future generations understand the burden and the blessings of freedom.
Let them say, we stood where duty required us to stand.

Let them know that together, we affirmed America, and the world, as a
community of conscience.

The winds of change are with us now. The forces of freedom are united. We
move toward the next century, more confident than ever, that we have the
will at home and abroad, to do what must be done--the hard work of
freedom.

May God bless the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished members of Congress, honored
guests and fellow citizens:

I mean to speak tonight of big things, of big changes and the promises they
hold and of some big problems and how together we can solve them and move
our country forward as the undisputed leader of the age.

We gather tonight at a dramatic and deeply promising time in our history,
and in the history of man on earth. For in the past 12 months, the world
has known changes of almost biblical proportions. And even now, months
after the failed coup that doomed a failed system, I am not sure we have
absorbed the full impact, the full import of what happened.

But Communism died this year. Even as President, with the most fascinating
possible vantage point, there were times when I was so busy helping to
manage progress and lead change that I didn't always show the joy that was
in my heart But the biggest thing that has happened in the world in my
life, in our lives, is this: By the grace of God, America won the Cold War.
And there's another to be singled out, though it may seem inelegant. I mean
a mass of people called the American taxpayer. No ever thinks to thank the
people who pay country's bill or an alliance's bill. But for a half Century
now, the American people have shouldered the burden and paid taxes that
were higher than they would have been to support a defense that was bigger
than it would have been if imperial communism had never existed. But it
did. But it doesn't anymore. And here is a fact I wouldn't mind the world
acknowledging: The American taxpayer bore the brunt of the burden, and
deserves a hunk of the glory.

And so, now, for the first time in 35 years, our strategic bombers stand
down. No longer are they on round-the-clock alert. Tomorrow our children
will go to school and study history and how plants grow. And they won't
have, as my children did, air-raid drills in which they crawl under their
desks and cover their heads in case of nuclear war. My grandchildren don't
have to do that, and won't have the bad dreams children once had in decades
past. There are still threats. But the long drawn-out dread is over.

A year ago tonight I spoke to you at a moment of high peril. American
forces had just unleashed Operation Desert Storm. And after 40 days in the
desert skies and 4 days on the ground, the men and women of America's armed
forces and our allies accomplished the goals that I declared, and that you
endorsed: we liberated Kuwait.

Soon after, the Arab world and Israel sat down to talk seriously, and
comprehensively, about peace, an historic first. And soon after that, at
Christmas, the last American hostages came home. Our policies were
vindicated.

Much good can come from the prudent use of power. And much good can come
from this: A world once divided into two armed camps now recognizes one
sole and pre-eminent power, the United States of America. And this they
regard with no dread. For the world trusts us with power, and the world is
right. They trust us to be fair, and restrained. They trust us to be on the
side of decency. They trust us to do what's right.

I use those words advisedly. A few days after the war began, I received a
telegram from Joanne Speicher, the wife of the first pilot killed in the
gulf, Lieutenant Commander Scott Speicher. Even in her grief, she wanted me
to know that some day, when her children were old enough, she would tell
them "that their father went away to war because it was the right thing to
do". She said it all. It was the right thing to do.

And we did it together. There were honest differences here, in this
chamber. But when the war began, you put your partisanship aside and
supported our troops. This is still a time for pride, but this is no time
to boast. For problems face us, and we must stand together once again and
solve them--and not let our country down.

Two years ago, I began planning cuts in military spending that reflected
the changes of the new era. But now, this year, with Imperial Communism
gone, that process can be accelerated. Tonight I can tell you of dramatic
changes in our strategic nuclear force. These are actions we are taking on
our own, because they are the right thing to do.

After completing 20 planes for which we have begun procurement, we will
shut down production of the B-2 bomber. We will cancel the ICBM program. We
will cease production of new warheads for our sea-based missiles. We will
stop all production of the peacekeeper missile. And we will not purchase
any more advanced cruise missiles.

This weekend I will meet at Camp David with Boris Yeltsin of the Russian
Federation. I have informed President Yeltsin that if the commonwealth, the
former Soviet Union, will eliminate all land-based multiple-warhead
ballistic missiles, I will do the following: We will eliminate all
Peacekeeper missiles. We will reduce the number of warheads on Minuteman
missiles to one and reduce the number of warheads on our sea-based missiles
by about one-third. And we will convert a substantial portion of our
strategic to primarily conventional use.

President Yeltsin's early response has been very positive, and I expect our
talks at Camp David to be fruitful. I want you to know that for half a
century, American presidents have longed to make such decisions and say
such words. But even in the midst of celebration, we must keep caution as a
friend. For the world is still a dangerous place. Only the dead have seen
the end of conflict. And though yesterday's challenges are behind us,
tomorrow's are being born.

The Secretary of defense recommended these cuts after consultation with the
joint chiefs of staff. And I make them with confidence. But do not
misunderstand me: The reductions I have approved will save us an additional
$50 billion over the next five years. By 1997 we will have cut defense by
30 percent since I took office. These cuts are deep, and you must know my
resolve: this deep, and no deeper. To do less would be insensible to
progress, but to do more would be ignorant of history. We must not go back
to the days of "the hollow army". We cannot repeat the mistakes made twice
in this century when armistice was followed by recklessness and defense was
purged as if the world was permanently safe.

I remind you this evening that I have asked for your support in funding a
program to protect our country from limited nuclear missile attack. We must
have this protection because too many people in too many countries have
access to nuclear arms. There are those who say that now we can turn away
from the world, that we have no special role, no special place. But we are
the United States of America, the leader of the West that has become the
leader of the world.

As long as I am President we will continue to lead in support of freedom
everywhere, not out of arrogance and not out of altruism, but for the
safety and security of our children. This is a fact: Strength in the
pursuit of peace is no vice; isolationism in the pursuit of security is no
virtue.

Now to our troubles at home. They are not all economic, but the primary
problem is our economy. There are some good signs. Inflation, that thief,
is down, and interest rates are down. But unemployment is too high, some
industries are in trouble and growth is not what it should be. Let me tell
you right from the start and right from the heart: I know we're in hard
times, but I know something else: This will not stand.

My friends in this chamber, we can bring the same courage and sense of
common purpose to the economy that we brought to Desert Storm. And we can
defeat hard times together. I believe you will help. One reason is that
you're patriots, and you want the best for your country. And I believe that
in your hearts you want to put partisanship aside and get the job done,
because it's the right thing to do.

The power of America rests in a stirring but simple idea: that people will
do great things if only you set them free. Well, we're going to have to set
the economy free, for if this age of miracles and wonders has taught us
anything, it's that if we can change the world, we can change America.

We must encourage investment. We must make it easier for people to invest
money and make new products, new industries, and new jobs. We must clear
away obstacles to new growth: high taxes, high regulation, red tape, and
yes, wasteful government spending. None of this will happen with a snap of
the fingers, but it will happen. And the test of a plan isn't whether it's
called new or dazzling. The American people aren't impressed by gimmicks.
They're smarter on this score than all of us in this room. The only test of
a plan is, It is sound and will it work? We must have a short-term plan to
address our immediate needs and heat up the economy. And then we need a
long-term plan to keep the combustion going and to guarantee our place in
the world economy.

There are certain things that a president can do without Congress, and I am
going to do them. I have this evening asked major cabinet departments and
federal agencies to institute a 90-day moratorium on any new federal
regulations that could hinder growth. In those 90 days, major departments
and agencies will carry out a top-to-bottom review of all regulations, old
and new, to stop the ones that will hurt growth and speed up those that
will help growth.

Further, for the untold number of hard-working, responsible American
workers and businessmen and women who've been forced to go without needed
bank loans, the banking credit crunch must end. I won't neglect my
responsibility for sound regulations that serve the public good, but
regulatory overkill must be stopped. And I have instructed our government
regulators to stop it.

I have directed Cabinet departments and federal agencies to speed up
pro-growth expenditures as quickly as possible. This should put an extra
$10 billion into the economy in the next six months. And our new
transportation bill provides more than $150 billion for construction and
maintenance projects that are vital to our growth and well-being. That
means jobs building roads, jobs building bridges and jobs building
railways. And I have this evening directed the secretary of the Treasury to
change the federal tax withholding tables. With this change, millions of
Americans from whom the government withholds more than necessary can now
choose to have the government withhold less from their paychecks. Something
tells me a number of taxpayers may take us up on this one. This initiative
could return about $25 billion back into the economy over the next 12
months, money people can use to help pay for clothing, college or a new
car. And finally, working with the Federal Reserve, we will continue to
support monetary policy that keeps both interest rates and inflation down.

Now these are the things that I can do. And now, members of Congress, let
me tell you what you can do for your country. You must, you must pass the
other elements of my plan to meet our economic needs. Everyone knows
investment speeds recovery. And I am proposing this evening a change in the
alternative minimum tax, and the creation of a new 15% investment tax
allowance. This will encourage businesses to accelerate investment and
bring people back to work. Real estate has led our economy out of almost
all the tough times we've ever had. Once building starts, carpenters and
plumbers work, people buy homes and take out mortgages.

My plan would modify the passive-loss rule for active real-estate
developers. And it would make it easier for pension plans to purchase real
estate. For those Americans who dream of buying a first home but who can't
quite afford it, my plan would allow first-time home buyers to withdraw
savings from IRAs without penalty and provide a $5000 tax credit for the
first purchase of that home.

And finally, my immediate plan calls on Congress to give crucial help to
people who own a home, to every one who has a business, a farm or a single
investment.

This time, at this hour, I cannot take "No" for an answer. You must cut the
capital gains tax on the people of this country. Never has an issue been so
demagogued by its opponents. But the demagogues are wrong. They are wrong,
and they know it. Sixty percent of people who benefit from lower capital
gains have incomes under $50,000. A cut in the capital gains tax increases
jobs and helps just about everyone in our country. And so I'm asking you to
cut the capital gains tax to a maximum of 15.4%. And I'll tell you, I'll
tell you, those of you who say, "Oh no, someone who's comfortable may
benefit from this" you kind of remind me of the old definition of the
Puritan, who couldn't sleep at night worrying that somehow someone
somewhere was out having a good time.

The opponents of this measure and those who've authored various so-called
soak-the-rich bills that are floating around this chamber should be
reminded of something: When they aim at the big guy, they usually hit the
little guy. And maybe it's time that stopped.

This then is my short-term plan. Your part, members of Congress, requires
enactment of these common-sense proposals that will have a strong effect on
the economy, without breaking the budget agreement and without raising tax
rates. And while my plan is being passed and kicking in, we've got to care
for those in trouble today. I have provided for up to $4.4 billion in my
budget to extend federal unemployment benefits, and I ask for Congressional
action right away. And I thank the committee--well, at last. And let's be
frank. Let's be frank; let me level with you.

I know, and you know, that my plan is unveiled in a political season. I
know, and you know, that everything I propose will be viewed by some in
merely partisan terms. But I ask you to know what is in my heart. And my
aim is to increase our nation's good. And I'm doing what I think is right;
I'm proposing what I know will help. I pride myself that I'm a prudent man,
and I believe that patience is a virtue, but I understand politics is, for
some, a game and that sometimes the game is to stop all progress and then
decry the lack of improvement. But let me tell you, let me tell you, far
more important than my political future--and far more important than
yours--is the well-being of our country. And members of this chamber,
members of this chamber, are practical people, and I know you won't resent
some practical advice: When people put their party's fortunes, whatever the
party, whatever the side of this aisle, before the public good, they court
defeat not only for their country, but for themselves. And they will
certainly deserve it.

And I submit my plan tomorrow. And I am asking you to pass it by March 20.
From the day after that--if it must be--the battle is joined. And you
know, when principle is at stake, I relish a good fair fight.

I said my plan has two parts, and it does. And it's the second part that is
the heart of the matter. For it's not enough to get an immediate burst. We
need long-term improvement in our economic position. We all know that the
key to our economic future is to insure that America continues as the
economic leader of the world. We have that in our power. Here, then, is my
long-term plan to guarantee our future.

First, trade: We will work to break down the walls that stop world trade.
We will work to open markets everywhere. And in our major trade
negotiations, I will continue pushing to eliminate tariffs and subsidies
that damage America's farmers and workers. And we'll get more good American
jobs within our own hemisphere through the North American Free Trade
Agreement, and through the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative. But
changes are here, and more are coming. The work place of the future will
demand more highly skilled workers than ever, people who are computer
literate, highly educated.

And we must be the world's leader in education. And we must revolutionize
America's schools. My America 2000 strategy will help us reach that goal.
My plan will give parents more choice, give teachers more flexibility and
help communities create new American schools. Thirty states across the
nation have established America 2000 programs. Hundreds of cities and towns
have joined. Now Congress must join this great movement. Pass my proposals
for new American schools.

That was my second long-term proposal. And here's my third: We must make
common-sense investments that will help us compete, long-term, in the
marketplace. We must encourage research and development. My plan is to make
the R and D tax credit permanent, and to provide record levels of support,
over $76 billion this year alone for people who explore the promise of
emerging technologies.

And fourth, we must do something about crime and drugs. And it is time for
a major renewed investment in fighting violent street crime. Its saps our
strength and hurts our faith in our society, and in our future together.
Surely a tired woman on her way to work at six in the morning on a subway
deserves the right to get there safely. And surely, it's true that everyone
who changes his or her way of life because of crime--from those afraid to
go our at night to those afraid to walk in the parks they pay for--surely
those people have been denied a basic civil right. It is time to restore
it. Congress, pass my comprehensive crime bill. It is tough on criminals
and supportive of police, and it has been languishing in these hallowed
halls for years now. Pass it. Help your country.

And fifth, I ask you tonight to fund our HOPE housing proposal and to pass
my enterprise-zone legislation, which will get businesses into the inner
city. We must empower the poor with the pride that comes from owning a
home, getting a job, becoming part of things. My plan would encourage real
estate construction by extending tax incentives for mortgage-revenue bonds
and low-income housing. And I ask tonight for record expenditures for the
program that helps children born into want move into excellence: Head
Start.

Step six: We must reform our health care system for this too, bears on
whether or not we can compete in the world. American health costs have been
exploding. This year America will spend over $800 billion on health, and
that is expected to grow to $1.6 trillion by the end of the decade. We
simply cannot afford this. The cost of health care shows up not only in
your family budget, but in the price of everything we buy and everything we
sell. When health coverage for a fellow on the assembly line costs
thousands of dollars, the cost goes into the product he makes. And you pay
the bill. Now we must make a choice.

Now some pretend we can have it both ways: they call it play or pay. But
that expensive approach is unstable. It will mean higher taxes, fewer jobs,
and eventually, a system under complete government control. Really, there
are only two options. And we can move toward a nationalized system, a
system which will restrict patient choice in picking a doctor and force the
government to ration services arbitrarily. And what we'll get is patients
in long lines, indifferent service and a huge new tax burden. Or we can
reform our own private health-care system, which still gives us, for all
its flaws, the best quality health care in the world. Well, let's build on
our strengths.

My plan provides insurance security for all Americans while preserving and
increasing the idea of choice. We make basic health insurance affordable
for all low-income people not now covered. We do it by providing a
health-insurance tax credit of up to $3750 for each low-income family. The
middle class gets help, too. And by reforming the health insurance market,
my plan assures that Americans will have access to basic health insurance
even if they change jobs or develop serious health problem We must bring
costs under control, preserve quality, preserve choice and reduce people's
nagging daily worry about health insurance. My plan, the details of which I
will announce shortly, does just that.

And seventh, we must get the federal deficit under control. We now have in
law, enforcable spending caps, and a requirement that we pay for the
programs we create. There are those in Congress who would ease that
discipline now. But I cannot let them do it. And I won't. My plan would
freeze all domestic discretionary budget authority which means "No more
next year than this year". I will not tamper with Social Security but I
would put real caps on the growth of uncontrolled spending. And I would
also freeze federal domestic government employment. And with the help of
Congress, my plan will get rid of 246 programs that don't deserve federal
funding. Some of them have noble titles, but none of them is indispensible.
We can get rid of each and every one of them.

You know, it's time we rediscovered a home truth the American people have
never forgotten: the government is too big and spends too much. And I call
on Congress to adopt a measure that will help put an end to the annual
ritual of filling the budget with pork-barrel appropriations. Every year,
the press has a field day making fun of outrageous examples, a Lawrence
Welk Museum, a research grant for Belgian Endive. We all know how these
things get into the budget, and maybe you need someone to help you say no.
I know how to say it. And you know what I need to make it stick. Give me
the same thing 43 governors have--the line-item veto--and let me help
you control spending.

We must put an end to unfinanced government mandates. These are the
requirements Congress puts on our cities, counties and states without
supplying the money. And if Congress passes a mandate, it should be forced
to pay for it and balance the cost with savings elsewhere. After all, a
mandate just increases someone else's tax burden, and that means higher
taxes at the state and local level.

Step Eight: Congress should enact the bold reform proposals that are still
awaiting congressional action: bank reform, civil justice reform, tort
reform, and my national energy strategy.

And finally, we must strengthen the family, because it is the family that
has the greatest bearing on our future. When Barbara holds an AIDS baby in
her arms and reads to children, she's saying to every person in this
country, "Family Matters".

And I am announcing tonight a new commission on America's urban families.
I've asked Missouri's governor, John Ashcroft, to be chairman, former
Dallas Mayor Annetter Strauss to be co-chair. You know, I had Mayors, the
leading mayors from the League of Cities, in the other day at the White
House, and they told me something striking. They said that every one of
them, Republican and Democrat, agreed on one thing: That the major cause of
the problems of the cities is the dissolution of the family. And they asked
for this commission, and they were right to ask, because it's time to
determine what we can do to keep families together, strong and sound.

There's one thing we can do right away: Ease the burden of rearing a child.
I ask you tonight to raise the personal exemption by $500 per child for
every family. For a family with four kids, that's an increase of $2000.
This is a good start in the right direction, and it's what we can afford.
It's time to allow families to deduct the interest they pay on student
loans. And I'm asking you to do just that. And I'm asking you to allow
people to use money from their IRAs to pay medical and educational
expenses, all without penalties. And I'm asking for more. Ask American
parents what they dislike about how things are going in our country, and
chances are good that pretty soon they'll get to welfare.

Americans are the most generous people on Earth. But we have to go back to
the insight of Franklin Roosevelt who, when he spoke of what became the
welfare program, want that it must not become a narcotic and a subtle
destroyer of the spirit. Welfare was never meant to be a life style. It was
never meant to be a habit. It was never supposed to be passed on from
generation to generation like a legacy. It's time to replace the
assumptions of the welfare state and help reform the welfare system.

States throughout the country are beginning to operate with new
assumptions: that when able-bodied people receive government assistance
they have responsibilities to the taxpayer. A responsibility to seek work,
education, or job training. A responsibility to get their lives in order. A
responsibility to hold their families together and refrain from having
children out of wedlock. And a responsibility to obey the law. We are going
to help this movement. Often, state reform requires waiving certain federal
regulations. I will act to make that process easier and quicker for every
state that asks our help. And I want to add, as we make these changes, we
work together to improve this system, that our intention is not
scapegoating and finger-pointing. If you read the papers or watch TV you
know there's been a rise these days in a certain kind of ugliness: racist
comments, anti-Semitism, an increased sense of division. Really, this is
not us. This is not who we are. And this is not acceptable.

And so you have my plan for America. And I am asking for big things, but I
believe in my heart you will do what's right.

And you know, it's kind of an American tradition to show a certain
skepticism toward our democratic institutions. I myself have sometimes
thought the aging process could be delayed if it had to make its way
through Congress. But you will deliberate, and you will discuss, and that
is fine. But my friends the people cannot wait. They need help now. And
there's a mood among us. People are worried. There has been talk of
decline. Someone even said our workers are lazy and uninspired. And I
thought, "Really? Go tell Neil Armstrong standing on the moon. Tell the
American farmer who feeds his country and the world. Tell the men and women
of Desert Storm." Moods come and go, but greatness endures. Our does.

And maybe for a moment it's good to remember what, in the dailyness of our
lives, we forget. We are still and ever the freest nation on Earth, the
kindest nation on Earth, the strongest nation on Earth. And we have always
risen to the occasion. And we are going to lift this nation out of hard
times inch by inch and day by day, and those who would stop us better step
aside. Because I look at hard times and I make this vow: This will not
stand. And so we move on, together, a rising nation, the once and future
miracle that is still, this night, the hope of the world.
To the Congress of the United States:

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress:

It is a great privilege to be here to outline a new budget and a new approach
for governing our great country. I thank you for your invitation to speak here
tonight. I want to thank so many of you who have accepted my invitation to come
to the White House to discuss important issues. We are off to a good start. I
will continue to meet with you and ask for your input. You have been kind and
candid, and I thank you for making a new President feel welcome.

The last time I visited the Capitol, I came to take an oath. On the steps of
this building, I pledged to honor our Constitution and laws, and I asked you to
join me in setting a tone of civility and respect in Washington. I hope America
is noticing the difference. We are making progress. Together, we are changing
the tone of our Nations capital. And this spirit of respect and cooperation is
vitalbecause in the end, we will be judged not only by what we say or how we
say it, but by what we are able to accomplish.

America today is a nation with great challengesbut greater resources. An artist
using statistics as a brush could paint two very different pictures of our
country. One would have warning signs: increasing layoffs, rising energy prices,
too many failing schools, persistent poverty, the stubborn vestiges of racism.
Another picture would be full of blessings: a balanced budget, big surpluses, a
military that is second to none, a country at peace with its neighbors,
technology that is revolutionizing the world, and our greatest strength,
concerned citizens who care for our country and for each other. Neither picture
is complete in and of itself. And tonight I challenge and invite Congress to
work with me to use the resources of one picture to repaint the otherto direct
the advantages of our time to solve the problems of our people.

Some of these resources will come from governmentsome, but not all. Year after
year in Washington, budget debates seem to come down to an old, tired argument:
on one side, those who want more government, regardless of the cost; on the
other, those who want less government, regardless of the need.

We should leave those arguments to the last century and chart a different
course. Government has a role, and an important one. Yet too much government
crowds out initiative and hard work, private charity and the private economy.
Our new governing vision says government should be active, but limited, engaged,
but not overbearing. My budget is based on that philosophy. It is reasonable and
it is responsible. It meets our obligations and funds our growing needs. We
increase spending next year for Social Security and Medicare and other
entitlement programs by $81 billion. We have increased spending for
discretionary programs by a very responsible 4 percent, above the rate of
inflation. My plan pays down an unprecedented amount of our national debt, and
then when money is still left over, my plan returns it to the people who earned
it in the first place.

A budgets impact is counted in dollars, but measured in lives. Excellent
schools, quality health care, a secure retirement, a cleaner environment, a
stronger defensethese are all important needs and we fund them.

The highest percentage increase in our budget should go to our childrens
education. Education is my top priority and by supporting this budget, you will
make it yours as well. Reading is the foundation of all learning, so during the
next 5 years, we triple spending, adding another $5 billion to help every child
in America learn to read. Values are important, so we have tripled funding for
character education to teach our children not only reading and writing, but
right from wrong.

We have increased funding to train and recruit teachers, because we know a good
education starts with a good teacher. And I have a wonderful partner in this
effort. I like teachers so much, I married one. Please help me salute our
gracious First Lady, Laura Bush.

Laura has begun a new effort to recruit Americans to the profession that will
shape our future: teaching. Laura will travel across America, to promote sound
teaching practices and early reading skills in our schools and in programs such
as Head Start.

When it comes to our schools, dollars alone do not always make the difference.
Funding is important, and so is reform. So we must tie funding to higher
standards and accountability for results.

I believe in local control of schools: we should not and we will not run our
public schools from Washington. Yet when the Federal Government spends tax
dollars, we must insist on results. Children should be tested on basic reading
and math skills every year, between grades three and eight. Measuring is the
only way to know whether all our children are learningand I want to know,
because I refuse to leave any child behind.

Critics of testing contend it distracts from learning. They talk about
teaching to the test. But let us put that logic to the test. If you test
children on basic math and reading skills, and you are teaching to the test,
you are teaching . . . math and reading. And that is the whole idea.

As standards rise, local schools will need more flexibility to meet them. So we
must streamline the dozens of Federal education programs into five and let
States spend money in those categories as they see fit.

Schools will be given a reasonable chance to improve, and the support to do so.
Yet if they do not, if they continue to fail, we must give parents and students
different optionsa better public school, a private school, tutoring, or a
charter school. In the end, every child in a bad situation must be given a
better choice, because when it comes to our children, failure is not an option.

Another priority in my budget is to keep the vital promises of Medicare and
Social Security, and together we will do so. To meet the health care needs of
all Americas seniors, we double the Medicare budget over the next 10 years.

My budget dedicates $238 billion to Medicare next year alone, enough to fund all
current programs and to begin a new prescription drug benefit for lowincome
seniors. No senior in America should have to choose between buying food and
buying prescriptions. To make sure the retirement savings of Americas seniors
are not diverted to any other programmy budget protects all $2.6 trillion of
the Social Security surplus for Social Security and for Social Security alone.

My budget puts a priority on access to health carewithout telling Americans
what doctor they have to see or what coverage they must choose. Many working
Americans do not have health care coverage. We will help them buy their own
insurance with refundable tax credits. And to provide quality care in low-income
neighborhoods, over the next 5 years we will double the number of people served
at community health care centers. And we will address the concerns of those who
have health coverage yet worry their insurance company does not care and will
not pay. Together, this Congress and this President will find common ground to
make sure doctors make medical decisions and patients get the health care they
deserve with a Patients Bill of Rights. When it comes to their health, people
want to get the medical care they need, not be forced to go to court because
they did not get it. We will ensure access to the courts for those with
legitimate claims, but first, let us put in place a strong independent review so
we promote quality health care, not frivolous lawsuits.

My budget also increases funding for medical research, which gives hope to many
who struggle with serious disease. Our prayers tonight are with one of your own
who is engaged in his own fight against cancer, a fine representative and a good
man, Congressman JOE MOAKLEY. God bless you, JOE. And I can think of no more
appropriate tribute to JOE than to have the Congress finish the job of doubling
the budget for the National Institutes of Health. My New Freedom Initiative for
Americans with Disabilities funds new technologies, expands opportunities to
work, and makes our society more welcoming. For the more than 50 million
Americans with disabilities, we must continue to break down barriers to
equality.

The budget I propose to you also supports the people who keep our country strong
and free, the men and women who serve in the United States military. I am
requesting $5.7 billion in increased military pay and benefits, and health care
and housing. Our men and women in uniform give America their best and we owe
them our support. Americas veterans honored their commitment to our country
through their military service. I will honor our commitment to them with a
billion dollar increase to ensure better access to quality care and faster
decisions on benefit claims.

My budget will improve our environment by accelerating the cleanup of toxic
Brownfields. And I propose we make a major investment in conservation by fully
funding the Land and Water Conservation Fund. Our National Parks have a special
place in our countrys life. Our parks are places of great natural beauty and
history. As good stewards, we must leave them better than we have found them, so
I propose providing $4.9 billion in resources over 5 years for the upkeep of
these national treasures.

And my budget adopts a hopeful new approach to help the poor and disadvantaged.
We must encourage and support the work of charities and faithbased and community
groups that offer help and love one person at a time. These groups are working
in every neighborhood in America, to fight homelessness and addiction and
domestic violence, to provide a hot meal or a mentor or a safe haven for our
children. Government should welcome these groups to apply for funds, not
discriminate against them.

Government cannot be replaced by charities or volunteers. And government should
not fund religious activities. But our Nations should support the good works of
these good people who are helping neighbors in need. So I am proposing allowing
all taxpayers, whether they itemize or not, to deduct their charitable
contributions. Estimates show this could encourage as much as $14 billion a year
in new charitable givingmoney that will save and change lives.

Our budget provides more than $700 million over the next 10 years for a Federal
Compassion Capital Fund with a focused and noble mission: to provide a mentor to
the more than 1 million children with a parent in prison, and to support other
local efforts to fight illiteracy, teen pregnancy, drug addiction, and other
difficult problems. With us tonight is the Mayor of Philadelphia. Please help me
welcome Mayor John Street. Mayor Street has encouraged faith-based and community
organizations to make a difference in Philadelphia and he has invited me to his
city this summer, to see compassion in action.

I am personally aware of just how effective the Mayor is. Mayor Street is a
Democrat. Let the record show that I lost his city. But some things are bigger
than politics. So I look forward to coming to your city to see your faithbased
programs in action.

As government promotes compassion, it also must promote justice. Too many of our
citizens have cause to doubt our Nations justice when the law points a finger
of suspicion at groups, instead of individuals. All our citizens are created
equal and must be treated equally. Earlier today I asked Attorney General
Ashcroft to develop specific recommendations to end racial profiling. It is
wrong. We must end it. In so doing, we will not hinder the work of our Nations
brave police officers. They protect us every day, often at great risk. But by
stopping the abuses of a few, we will add to the public confidence our police
officers earn and deserve.

My budget has funded a responsible increase in our ongoing operations, it has
funded our Nations important priorities, it has protected Social Security and
Medicare, and our surpluses are big enough that there is still money left over.

Many of you have talked about the need to pay down our national debt. I have
listened, and I agree.

My budget proposal pays down an unprecedented amount of public debt. We owe it
to our children and grandchildren to act now, and I hope you will join me to pay
down $2 trillion in debt during the next 10 years.

At the end of those 10 years, we will have paid down all the debt that is
available to retire. That is more debt repaid more quickly than has ever been
repaid by any nation at any time in history.

We should also prepare for the unexpected, for the uncertainties of the future.
We should approach our Nations budget as any prudent family would, with a
contingency fund for emergencies or additional spending needs.

For example, after a strategic review, we may need to increase defense spending,
we may need additional money for our farmers, or additional money to reform
Medicare. And so my budget sets aside almost a trillion dollars over 10 years
for additional needs . . . that is one trillion additional reasons you can feel
comfortable supporting this budget. We have increased our budget at a
responsible 4 percent, we have funded our priorities, we have paid down all the
available debt, we have prepared for contingenciesand we still have money left
over.

Yogi Berra once said: When you come to a fork in the road, take it. Now we
come to a fork in the road. We have two choices. Even though we have already met
our needs, we could spend the money on more and bigger government. That is the
road our Nation has traveled in recent years. Last year, government spending
shot up 8 percent. That is far more than our economy grew, far more than
personal income grew and far more than the rate of inflation. If you continue on
that road, you will spend the surplus and have to dip into Social Security to
pay other bills.

Unrestrained government spending is a dangerous road to deficits, so we must
take a different path. The other choice is to let the American people spend
their own money to meet their own needs, to fund their own priorities and pay
down their own debts. I hope you will join me and stand firmly on the side of
the people.

The growing surplus exists because taxes are too high and government is charging
more than it needs. The people of America have been overcharged and on their
behalf, I am here to ask for a refund.

Some say my tax plan is too big, others say it is too small. I respectfully
disagree. This tax relief is just right. I did not throw darts at a board to
come up with a number for tax relief. I did not take a poll, or develop an
arbitrary formula that might sound good. I looked at problems in the tax code
and calculated the cost to fix them. A tax rate of 15 percent is too high for
those who earn low wages, so we lowered the rate to 10 percent. No one should
pay more than a third of the money they earn in Federal income taxes, so we
lowered the top rate to 33 percent. This reform will be welcome relief for
Americas small businesses, which often pay taxes at the highest rate, and help
for small business means jobs for Americans.

We simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax rates from the current
five rates to four lower ones: 10, 15, 25, and 33 percent. In my plan, no one is
targeted in or targeted out . . . every one who pays income taxes will get tax
relief.

Our government should not tax, and thereby discourage marriage, so we reduced
the marriage penalty. I want to help families rear and support their children,
so we doubled the child credit to $1,000 per child. It is not fair to tax the
same earnings twiceonce when you earn them, and again when you die, so we must
repeal the death tax. These changes add up to significant help. A typical family
with two children will save $1,600 a year on their Federal income taxes. Sixteen
hundred dollars may not sound like a lot to some, but it means a lot to many
families. Sixteen hundred dollars buys gas for two cars for an entire year, it
pays tuition for a year at a community college, it pays the average family
grocery bill for 3 months. That is real money.

With us tonight, representing many American families, are Steven and Josefina
Ramos. Please help me welcome them. The Ramoses are from Pennsylvania, but they
could be from any one of your districts. Steven is a network administrator for a
school district, Josefina is a Spanish teacher at a charter school, and they
have a 2-yearold daughter, Lianna. Steven and Josefina tell me they pay almost
$8,000 a year in Federal income taxes; my plan will same them more than $2,000.
Let me tell you what Steven says:

Two thousand dollars a year means a lot to my family. If we had this money, it
would help us reach our goal of paying off our personal debt in two years.
After that, Steven and Josefina want to start saving for Liannas college
education. Government should never stand in the way of families achieving their
dreams. The surplus is not the governments money, the surplus is the peoples
money.

For lower-income families, my tax relief plan restores basic fairness. Right
now, complicated tax rules punish hard work. A waitress supporting two children
on $25,000 a year can lose nearly half of every additional dollar she earns. Her
overtime, her hardest hours, are taxed at nearly 50 percent. This sends a
terrible message: You will never get ahead. But Americas message must be
different: We must honor hard work, never punish it.

With tax relief, overtime will no longer be overtax time for the waitress.
People with the smallest incomes will get the highest percentage reductions. And
millions of additional American families will be removed from the income tax
rolls entirely.

Tax relief is right and tax relief is urgent. The long economic expansion that
began almost 10 years ago is faltering. Lower interest rates will eventually
help, but we cannot assume they will do the job all by themselves. Forty years
ago and then twenty years ago, two Presidents, one Democrat and one Republican,
John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan, advocated tax cuts toin President Kennedys
wordsget this country moving again.

They knew then, what we must do now: To create economic growth and opportunity,
we must put money back into the hands of the people who buy goods and create
jobs.

We must act quickly. The Chairman of the Federal Reserve has testified before
Congress that tax cuts often come too late to stimulate economic recovery. So I
want to work with you to give our economy an important jump start by making tax
relief retroactive. We must act now because it is the right thing to do. We must
also act now because we have other things to do. We must show courage to
confront and resolve tough challenges: to restructure our Nations defenses, to
meet our growing need for energy, and to reform Medicare and Social Security.
America has a window of opportunity to extend and secure our present peace by
promoting a distinctly American internationalism. We will work with our allies
and friends to be a force for good and a champion of freedom. We will work for
free markets and free trade and freedom from oppression. Nations making progress
toward freedom will find America is their friend. We will promote our values,
and we will promote peace. And we need a strong military to keep the peace. But
our military was shaped to confront the challenges of the past. So I have asked
the Secretary of Defense to review Americas armed forces and prepare to
transform them to meet emerging threats. My budget makes a downpayment on the
research and development that will be required. Yet, in our broader
transformation effort, we must put strategy first, then spending. Our defense
vision will drive our defense budget, not the other way around. Our Nation also
needs a clear strategy to confront the threats of the 21st century, threats that
are more widespread and less certain. They range from terrorists who threaten
with bombs to tyrants and rogue nations intent on developing weapons of mass
destruction. To protect our own people, our allies and friends, we must develop
and we must deploy effective missile defenses.

And as we transform our military, we can discard Cold War relics, and reduce our
own nuclear forces to reflect todays needs.

A strong America is the worlds best hope for peace and freedom. Yet the cause
of freedom rests on more than our ability to defend ourselves and our allies.
Freedom is exported every day, as we ship goods and products that improve the
lives of millions of people. Free trade brings greater political and personal
freedom.

Each of the previous five Presidents has had the ability to negotiate
farreaching trade agreements. Tonight I ask you to give me the strong hand of
presidential trade promotion authority, and to do so quickly.

As we meet tonight, many citizens are struggling with the high costs of energy.
We have a serious energy problem that demands a national energy policy. The West
is confronting a major energy shortage that has resulted in high prices and
uncertainty. I have asked Federal agencies to work with California officials to
help speed construction of new energy sources. And I have directed Vice
President CHENEY, Commerce Secretary Evans, Energy Secretary Abraham, and other
senior members of my Administration to recommend a national energy policy.

Our energy demand outstrips our supply. We can produce more energy at home while
protecting our environment, and we must. We can produce more electricity to meet
demand, and we must. We can promote alternative energy sources and conservation,
and we must. America must become more energy independent.

Perhaps the biggest test of our foresight and courage will be reforming Medicare
and Social Security. Medicares finances are strained and its coverage is
outdated. Ninety-nine percent of employer-provided health plans offer some form
of prescription drug coverage . . . Medicare does not. The framework for reform
has been developed by Senators FRIST and BREAUX and Congressman THOMAS, and now,
it is time to act. Medicare must be modernized. And we must make sure that every
senior on Medicare can choose a health plan that offers prescription drugs.

Seven years from now, the baby boom generation will begin to claim Social
Security benefits. Everyone in this chamber knows that Social Security is not
prepared to fully fund their retirement. And we only have a couple of years to
get prepared. Without reform, this country will one day awaken to a stark
choice: either a drastic rise in payroll taxes, or a radical cut in retirement
benefits. There is a better way.

This spring I will form a presidential commission to reform Social Security. The
commission will make its recommendations by next fall. Reform should be based on
these principles: It must preserve the benefits of all current retirees and
those nearing retirement. It must return Social Security to sound financial
footing. And it must offer personal savings accounts to younger workers who want
them. Social Security now offers workers a return of less than 2 percent on the
money they pay into the system. To save the system, we must increase that by
allowing younger workers to make safe, sound investments at a higher rate of
return.

Ownership, access to wealth, and independence should not be the privilege of a
few. They are the hope of every American . . . and we must make them the
foundation of Social Security. By confronting the tough challenge of reform, by
being responsible with our budget, we can earn the trust of the American people.
And, we can add to that trust by enacting fair and balanced election and
campaign finance reforms.

The agenda I have set before you tonight is worthy of a great country. America
is a nation at peace, but not a nation at rest. Much has been given to us, and
much is expected. Let us agree to bridge old divides. But let us also agree that
our good will must be dedicated to great goals. Bipartisanship is more than
minding our manners, it is doing our duty. No one can speak in this Capitol and
not be awed by its history. At so many turning points, debates in these chambers
have reflected the collected or divided conscience of our country. And when we
walk through Statuary Hall, and see those men and women of marble, we are
reminded of their courage and achievement.

Yet Americas purpose is never found in statues or history. Americas purpose
always stands before us. Our generation must show courage in a time of blessing,
as our Nation has always shown in times of crisis. And our courage issue by
issue, can gather to greatness, and serve our country. This is the privilege,
and responsibility, we share. And if we work together, we can prove that public
service is noble.

We all came here for a reason. We all have things we want to accomplish, and
promises to keep. Juntos podemos, together we can. We can make Americans proud
of their government. Together we can share in the credit of making our country
more prosperous and generous and justand earn from our conscience and from our
fellow citizens, the highest possible praise: well done, good and faithful
servants.

Thank you. Good night. And God Bless America.

GEORGE W. BUSH.
THE WHITE HOUSE, February 27, 2001.
Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress,
distinguished guests, fellow citizens: As we gather tonight, our Nation is at
war; our economy is in recession; and the civilized world faces unprecedented
dangers. Yet, the state of our Union has never been stronger.

We last met in an hour of shock and suffering. In 4 short months, our Nation has
comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New York and the Pentagon, rallied a
great coalition, captured, arrested, and rid the world of thousands of
terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan's terrorist training camps, saved a people
from starvation, and freed a country from brutal oppression.

The American flag flies again over our Embassy in Kabul. Terrorists who once
occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at Guantanamo Bay. And terrorist leaders
who urged followers to sacrifice their lives are running for their own.

America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror. We'll be partners in
rebuilding that country. And this evening we welcomed the distinguished interim
leader of a liberated Afghanistan, Chairman Hamid Karzai.

The last time we met in this Chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan
were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to school.
Today women are free and are part of Afghanistan's new Government. And we
welcome the new Minister of Women's Affairs, Dr. Sima Samar.

Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the resolve of
our coalition, and to the might of the United States military. When I called our
troops into action, I did so with complete confidence in their courage and
skill. And tonight, thanks to them, we are winning the war on terror. The men
and women of our Armed Forces have delivered a message now clear to every enemy
of the United States: Even 7,000 miles away, across oceans and continents, on
mountaintops and in caves, you will not escape the justice of this Nation.

For many Americans, these 4 months have brought sorrow and pain that will never
completely go away. Every day a retired firefighter returns to Ground Zero to
feel closer to his two sons who died there. At a memorial in New York, a little
boy left his football with a note for his lost father: "Dear Daddy, please take
this to heaven. I don't want to play football until I can play with you again
some day." Last month, at the grave of her husband, Micheal, a CIA officer and
marine who died in Mazar-e-Sharif, Shannon Spann said these words of farewell,
"Semper Fi, my love." Shannon is with us tonight. Shannon, I assure you and
all who have lost a loved one that our cause is just, and our country will never
forget the debt we owe Michael and all who gave their lives for freedom.

Our cause is just, and it continues. Our discoveries in Afghanistan confirmed
our worst fears and showed us the true scope of the task ahead. We have seen the
depth of our enemies' hatred in videos where they laugh about the loss of
innocent life. And the depth of their hatred is equaled by the madness of the
destruction they design. We have found diagrams of American nuclear powerplants
and public water facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons,
surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of landmarks in
America and throughout the world.

What we have found in Afghanistan confirms that, far from ending there, our war
against terror is only beginning. Most of the 19 men who hijacked planes on
September the 11th were trained in Afghanistan's camps, and so were tens of
thousands of others. Thousands of dangerous killers, schooled in the methods of
murder, often supported by outlaw regimes, are now spread throughout the world
like ticking timebombs, set to go off without warning.

Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition partners,
hundreds of terrorists have been arrested. Yet, tens of thousands of trained
terrorists are still at large. These enemies view the entire world as a
battlefield, and we must pursue them wherever they are. So long as training
camps operate, so long as nations harbor terrorists, freedom is at risk. And
America and our allies must not and will not allow it.

Our Nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent in the
pursuit of two great objectives. First, we will shut down terrorist camps,
disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to justice. And second, we must
prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, biological, or nuclear
weapons from threatening the United States and the world.

Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan out of business,
yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries. A terrorist underworld,
including groups like Hamas, Hizballah, Islamic Jihad, Jaish-e-Mohammed,
operates in remote jungles and deserts and hides in the centers of large cities.

While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America is acting
elsewhere. We now have troops in the Philippines, helping to train that
country's armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have executed an
American and still hold hostages. Our soldiers, working with the Bosnian
Government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our Embassy. Our Navy is
patrolling the coast of Africa to block the shipment of weapons and the
establishment of terrorist camps in Somalia.

My hope is that all nations will heed our call and eliminate the terrorist
parasites who threaten their countries and our own. Many nations are acting
forcefully. Pakistan is now cracking down on terror, and I admire the strong
leadership of President Musharraf. But some governments will be timid in the
face of terror. And make no mistake about it: If they do not act, America will.

Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening
America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction. Some of
these regimes have been pretty quiet since September the 11th, but we know their
true nature.

North Korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction,
while starving its citizens.

Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror, while an unelected
few repress the Iranian people's hope for freedom.

Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror. The
Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons
for over a decade. This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder
thousands of its own citizens, leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their
dead children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections, then
kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the
civilized world.

States like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil, arming
to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of mass destruction,
these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They could provide these arms to
terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred. They could attack our
allies or attempt to blackmail the United States. In any of these cases, the
price of indifference would be catastrophic.

We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state
sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and deliver weapons of
mass destruction. We will develop and deploy effective missile defenses to
protect America and our allies from sudden attack. And all nations should know:
America will do what is necessary to ensure our Nation's security.

We'll be deliberate; yet, time is not on our side. I will not wait on events
while dangers gather. I will not stand by as peril draws closer and closer. The
United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to
threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons.

Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This campaign may not be
finished on our watch; yet, it must be and it will be waged on our watch. We
can't stop short. If we stop now, leaving terror camps intact and terrorist
states unchecked, our sense of security would be false and temporary. History
has called America and our allies to action, and it is both our responsibility
and our privilege to fight freedom's fight.

Our first priority must always be the security of our Nation, and that will be
reflected in the budget I send to Congress. My budget supports three great goals
for America: We will win this war; we will protect our homeland; and we will
revive our economy.

September the 11th brought out the best in America and the best in this
Congress. And I join the American people in applauding your unity and resolve.
Now Americans deserve to have this same spirit directed toward addressing
problems here at home. I'm a proud member of my party. Yet as we act to win the
war, protect our people, and create jobs in America, we must act, first and
foremost, not as Republicans, not as Democrats but as Americans.

It costs a lot to fight this war. We have spent more than a billion dollars a
month, over $30 million a day, and we must be prepared for future operations.
Afghanistan proved that expensive precision weapons defeat the enemy and spare
innocent lives, and we need more of them. We need to replace aging aircraft and
make our military more agile to put our troops anywhere in the world quickly and
safely. Our men and women in uniform deserve the best weapons, the best
equipment, the best training, and they also deserve another pay raise.

My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two decades,
because while the price of freedom and security is high, it is never too high.
Whatever it costs to defend our country, we will pay.

The next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to protect our
citizens and strengthen our Nation against the ongoing threat of another attack.
Time and distance from the events of September the 11th will not make us safer
unless we act on its lessons. America is no longer protected by vast oceans. We
are protected from attack only by vigorous action abroad and increased vigilance
at home.

My budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy of homeland security,
focused on four key areas: bioterrorism, emergency response, airport and border
security, and improved intelligence. We will develop vaccines to fight anthrax
and other deadly diseases. We'll increase funding to help States and communities
train and equip our heroic police and firefighters. We will improve intelligence
collection and sharing, expand patrols at our borders, strengthen the security
of air travel, and use technology to track the arrivals and departures of
visitors to the United States.

Homeland security will make America not only stronger but, in many ways, better.
Knowledge gained from bioterrorism research will improve public health. Stronger
police and fire departments will mean safer neighborhoods. Stricter border
enforcement will help combat illegal drugs. And as government works to better
secure our homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of
alert citizens.

A few days before Christmas, an airline flight attendant spotted a passenger
lighting a match. The crew and passengers quickly subdued the man, who had been
trained by Al Qaida and was armed with explosives. The people on that plane were
alert and, as a result, likely saved nearly 200 lives. And tonight we welcome
and thank flight attendants Hermis Moutardier and Christina Jones.

Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the final
great priority of my budget is economic security for the American people. To
achieve these great national objectives--to win the war, protect the homeland,
and revitalize our economy--our budget will run a deficit that will be small and
short term, so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally
responsible manner. We have clear priorities, and we must act at home with the
same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas. We'll prevail in the war, and
we will defeat this recession.

Americans who have lost their jobs need our help, and I support extending
unemployment benefits and direct assistance for health care coverage. Yet,
American workers want more than unemployment checks; they want a steady
paycheck. When America works, America prospers, so my economic security plan can
be summed up in one word: jobs.

Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start. Republicans
and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no
child is left behind. I was proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman
John Boehner and Congressman George Miller; Senator Judd Gregg. And I was so
proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend Ted Kennedy.
(Laughter) I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say
such a thing-- (laughter)--but our work on this bill shows what is possible if
we set aside posturing and focus on results.

There is more to do. We need to prepare our children to read and succeed in
school with improved Head Start and early childhood development programs. We
must upgrade our teacher colleges and teacher training and launch a major
recruiting drive with a great goal for America, a quality teacher in every
classroom.

Good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy. This Congress must act
to encourage conservation, promote technology, build infrastructure, and it must
act to increase energy production at home so America is less dependent on
foreign oil.

Good jobs depend on expanded trade. Selling into new markets creates new jobs,
so I ask Congress to finally approve trade promotion authority.

On these two key issues, trade and energy, the House of Representatives has
acted to create jobs, and I urge the Senate to pass this legislation.

Good jobs depend on sound tax policy. Last year, some in this Hall thought my
tax relief plan was too small; some thought it was too big. But when the checks
arrived in the mail, most Americans thought tax relief was just about right.
Congress listened to the people and responded by reducing tax rates, doubling
the child credit, and ending the death tax. For the sake of long-term growth and
to help Americans plan for the future, let's make these tax cuts permanent.

The way out of this recession, the way to create jobs, is to grow the economy by
encouraging investment in factories and equipment and by speeding up tax relief
so people have more money to spend. For the sake of American workers, let's pass
a stimulus package.

Good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform. As we reauthorize these important
reforms, we must always remember the goal is to reduce dependency on government
and offer every American the dignity of a job.

Americans know economic security can vanish in an instant without health
security. I ask Congress to join me this year to enact a patients' bill of
rights, to give uninsured workers credits to help buy health coverage, to
approve an historic increase in the spending for veterans' health, and to give
seniors a sound and modern Medicare system that includes coverage for
prescription drugs.

A good job should lead to security in retirement. I ask Congress to enact new
safeguards for 401K and pension plans. Employees who have worked hard and saved
all their lives should not have to risk losing everything if their company
fails. Through stricter accounting standards and tougher disclosure
requirements, corporate America must be made more accountable to employees and
shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct.

Retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments of Social
Security, and we will. We must make Social Security financially stable and allow
personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose them.

Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead on other issues:
productive farm policy; a cleaner environment; broader homeownership, especially
among minorities; and ways to encourage the good work of charities and
faith-based groups. I ask you to join me on these important domestic issues in
the same spirit of cooperation we've applied to our war against terrorism.

During these last few months, I've been humbled and privileged to see the true
character of this country in a time of testing. Our enemies believed America was
weak and materialistic, that we would splinter in fear and selfishness. They
were as wrong as they are evil.

The American people have responded magnificently, with courage and compassion,
strength and resolve. As I have met the heroes, hugged the families, and looked
into the tired faces of rescuers, I have stood in awe of the American people.

And I hope you will join me--I hope you will join me in expressing thanks to one
American for the strength and calm and comfort she brings to our Nation in
crisis, our First Lady, Laura Bush.

None of us would ever wish the evil that was done on September the 11th. Yet,
after America was attacked, it was as if our entire country looked into a mirror
and saw our better selves. We were reminded that we are citizens with
obligations to each other, to our country, and to history. We began to think
less of the goods we can accumulate and more about the good we can do.

For too long our culture has said, "If it feels good, do it." Now America is
embracing a new ethic and a new creed, "Let's roll." In the sacrifice of
soldiers, the fierce brotherhood of firefighters, and the bravery and generosity
of ordinary citizens, we have glimpsed what a new culture of responsibility
could look like. We want to be a nation that serves goals larger than self.
We've been offered a unique opportunity, and we must not let this moment pass.

My call tonight is for every American to commit at least 2 years, 4,000 hours
over the rest of your lifetime, to the service of your neighbors and your
Nation. Many are already serving, and I thank you. If you aren't sure how to
help, I've got a good place to start. To sustain and extend the best that has
emerged in America, I invite you to join the new USA Freedom Corps. The Freedom
Corps will focus on three areas of need: responding in case of crisis at home;
rebuilding our communities; and extending American compassion throughout the
world.

One purpose of the USA Freedom Corps will be homeland security. America needs
retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major emergencies, volunteers
to help police and fire departments, transportation and utility workers
well-trained in spotting danger.

Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities. We need
mentors to love children, especially children whose parents are in prison. And
we need more talented teachers in troubled schools. USA Freedom Corps will
expand and improve the good efforts of AmeriCorps and Senior Corps to recruit
more than 200,000 new volunteers.

And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part
of the world. So we will renew the promise of the Peace Corps, double its
volunteers over the next 5 years, and ask it to join a new effort to encourage
development and education and opportunity in the Islamic world.

This time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity, a moment we must
seize to change our culture. Through the gathering momentum of millions of acts
of service and decency and kindness, I know we can overcome evil with greater
good.

And we have a great opportunity during this time of war to lead the world toward
the values that will bring lasting peace. All fathers and mothers, in all
societies, want their children to be educated and live free from poverty and
violence. No people on Earth yearn to be oppressed or aspire to servitude or
eagerly await the midnight knock of the secret police. If anyone doubts this,
let them look to Afghanistan, where the Islamic "street" greeted the fall of
tyranny with song and celebration. Let the skeptics look to Islam's own rich
history, with its centuries of learning and tolerance and progress. America will
lead by defending liberty and justice because they are right and true and
unchanging for all people everywhere.

No nation owns these aspirations, and no nation is exempt from them. We have no
intention of imposing our culture. But America will always stand firm for the
nonnegotiable demands of human dignity: the rule of law; limits on the power of
the state; respect for women; private property; free speech; equal justice; and
religious tolerance.

America will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these values
around the world, including the Islamic world, because we have a greater
objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment. We seek a just and
peaceful world beyond the war on terror.

In this moment of opportunity, a common danger is erasing old rivalries. America
is working with Russia and China and India, in ways we have never before, to
achieve peace and prosperity. In every region, free markets and free trade and
free societies are proving their power to lift lives. Together with friends and
allies from Europe to Asia and Africa to Latin America, we will demonstrate that
the forces of terror cannot stop the momentum of freedom.

The last time I spoke here, I expressed the hope that life would return to
normal. In some ways, it has. In others, it never will. Those of us who have
lived through these challenging times have been changed by them. We've come to
know truths that we will never question: Evil is real, and it must be opposed.
Beyond all differences of race or creed, we are one country, mourning together
and facing danger together. Deep in the American character, there is honor, and
it is stronger than cynicism. And many have discovered again that even in
tragedy--especially in tragedy--God is near.

In a single instant, we realized that this will be a decisive decade in the
history of liberty, that we've been called to a unique role in human events.
Rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or consequential.

Our enemies send other people's children on missions of suicide and murder. They
embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a creed. We stand for a different
choice, made long ago on the day of our founding. We affirm it again today. We
choose freedom and the dignity of every life.

Steadfast in our purpose, we now press on. We have known freedom's price. We
have shown freedom's power. And in this great conflict, my fellow Americans, we
will see freedom's victory.

Thank you all. May God bless.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished citizens
and fellow citizens: Every year, by law and by custom, we meet here to consider
the state of the Union. This year, we gather in this Chamber deeply aware of
decisive days that lie ahead.

You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence. During this session
of Congress, we have the duty to reform domestic programs vital to our country.
We have the opportunity to save millions of lives abroad from a terrible
disease. We will work for a prosperity that is broadly shared, and we will
answer every danger and every enemy that threatens the American people.

In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be confident. In a
whirlwind of change and hope and peril, our faith is sure; our resolve is firm;
and our Union is strong.

This country has many challenges. We will not deny, we will not ignore, we will
not pass along our problems to other Congresses, to other Presidents, and other
generations. We will confront them with focus and clarity and courage.

During the last 2 years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we work
together. To lift the standards of our public schools, we achieved historic
education reform, which must now be carried out in every school and in every
classroom so that every child in America can read and learn and succeed in life.
To protect our country, we reorganized our Government and created the Department
of Homeland Security, which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era. To
bring our economy out of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a
generation. To insist on integrity in American business, we passed tough
reforms, and we are holding corporate criminals to account.

Some might call this a good record. I call it a good start. Tonight I ask the
House and the Senate to join me in the next bold steps to serve our fellow
citizens.

Our first goal is clear: We must have an economy that grows fast enough to
employ every man and woman who seeks a job. After recession, terrorist attacks,
corporate scandals, and stock market declines, our economy is recovering. Yet,
it's not growing fast enough or strongly enough. With unemployment rising, our
Nation needs more small businesses to open, more companies to invest and expand,
more employers to put up the sign that says, "Help Wanted." Jobs are created
when the economy grows. The economy grows when Americans have more money to
spend and invest, and the best and fairest way to make sure Americans have that
money is not to tax it away in the first place.

I am proposing that all the income-tax reductions set for 2004 and 2006 be made
permanent and effective this year. And under my plan, as soon as I've signed the
bill, this extra money will start showing up in workers' paychecks. Instead of
gradually reducing the marriage penalty, we should do it now. Instead of slowly
raising the child credit to $1,000, we should send the checks to American
families now.

The tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes, and it will help our
economy immediately: 92 million Americans will keep, this year, an average of
almost $1,100 more of their own money; a family of 4 with an income of $40,000
would see their Federal income taxes fall from $1,178 to $45 per year; our plan
will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small businesses.

You, the Congress, have already passed all these reductions and promised them
for future years. If this tax relief is good for Americans 3, or 5, or 7 years
from now, it is even better for Americans today.

We should also strengthen the economy by treating investors equally in our tax
laws. It's fair to tax a company's profits. It is not fair to again tax the
shareholder on the same profits. To boost investor confidence and to help the
nearly 10 million seniors who receive dividend income, I ask you to end the
unfair double taxation of dividends.

Lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy expand. More jobs mean
more taxpayers and higher revenues to our Government. The best way to address
the deficit and move toward a balanced budget is to encourage economic growth
and to show some spending discipline in Washington, DC.

We must work together to fund only our most important priorities. I will send
you a budget that increases discretionary spending by 4 percent next year, about
as much as the average family's income is expected to grow. And that is a good
benchmark for us. Federal spending should not rise any faster than the paychecks
of American families.

A growing economy and a focus on essential priorities will be crucial to the
future of Social Security. As we continue to work together to keep Social
Security sound and reliable, we must offer younger workers a chance to invest in
retirement accounts that they will control and they will own.

Our second goal is high quality, affordable health for all Americans. The
American system of medicine is a model of skill and innovation, with a pace of
discovery that is adding good years to our lives. Yet for many people, medical
care costs too much, and many have no health coverage at all. These problems
will not be solved with a nationalized health care system that dictates coverage
and rations care.

Instead, we must work toward a system in which all Americans have a good
insurance policy, choose their own doctors, and seniors and low- income
Americans receive the help they need. Instead of bureaucrats and trial lawyers
and HMOs, we must put doctors and nurses and patients back in charge of American
medicine.

Health care reform must begin with Medicare. Medicare is the binding commitment
of a caring society. We must renew that commitment by giving seniors access to
preventive medicine and new drugs that are transforming health care in America.

Seniors happy with the current Medicare system should be able to keep their
coverage just the way it is. And just like you, the Members of Congress, and
your staffs and other Federal employees, all seniors should have the choice of a
health care plan that provides prescription drugs.

My budget will commit an additional $400 billion over the next decade to reform
and strengthen Medicare. Leaders of both political parties have talked for years
about strengthening Medicare. I urge the Members of this new Congress to act
this year.

To improve our health care system, we must address one of the prime causes of
higher cost, the constant threat that physicians and hospitals will be unfairly
sued. Because of excessive litigation, everybody pays more for health care, and
many parts of America are losing fine doctors. No one has ever been healed by a
frivolous lawsuit. I urge the Congress to pass medical liability reform.

Our third goal is to promote energy independence for our country, while
dramatically improving the environment. I have sent you a comprehensive energy
plan to promote energy efficiency and conservation, to develop cleaner
technology, and to produce more energy at home. I have sent you Clear Skies
legislation that mandates a 70-percent cut in air pollution from powerplants
over the next 15 years. I have sent you a Healthy Forests Initiative, to help
prevent the catastrophic fires that devastate communities, kill wildlife, and
burn away millions of acres of treasured forests.

I urge you to pass these measures, for the good of both our environment and our
economy. Even more, I ask you to take a crucial step and protect our environment
in ways that generations before us could not have imagined.

In this century, the greatest environmental progress will come about not through
endless lawsuits or command-and-control regulations but through technology and
innovation. Tonight I'm proposing $1.2 billion in research funding so that
America can lead the world in developing clean, hydrogen-powered automobiles.

A simple chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen generates energy, which
can be used to power a car, producing only water, not exhaust fumes. With a new
national commitment, our scientists and engineers will overcome obstacles to
taking these cars from laboratory to showroom, so that the first car driven by a
child born today could be powered by hydrogen and pollution-free. Join me in
this important innovation to make our air significantly cleaner and our country
much less dependent on foreign sources of energy.

Our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of America to the deepest problems of
America. For so many in our country, the homeless and the fatherless, the
addicted, the need is great. Yet there's power, wonder- working power, in the
goodness and idealism and faith of the American people.

Americans are doing the work of compassion every day, visiting prisoners,
providing shelter for battered women, bringing companionship to lonely seniors.
These good works deserve our praise. They deserve our personal support, and when
appropriate, they deserve the assistance of the Federal Government.

I urge you to pass both my Faith-Based Initiative and the Citizen Service Act,
to encourage acts of compassion that can transform America, one heart and one
soul at a time.

Last year, I called on my fellow citizens to participate in the USA Freedom
Corps, which is enlisting tens of thousands of new volunteers across America.
Tonight I ask Congress and the American people to focus the spirit of service
and the resources of Government on the needs of some of our most vulnerable
citizens, boys and girls trying to grow up without guidance and attention and
children who have to go through a prison gate to be hugged by their mom or dad.
I propose a $450 million initiative to bring mentors to more than a million
disadvantaged junior high students and children of prisoners. Government will
support the training and recruiting of mentors. Yet it is the men and women of
America who will fill the need. One mentor, one person can change a life
forever, and I urge you to be that one person.

Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs. Addiction crowds out
friendship, ambition, moral conviction and reduces all the richness of life to a
single destructive desire. As a government, we are fighting illegal drugs by
cutting off supplies and reducing demand through antidrug education programs.
Yet for those already addicted, the fight against drugs is a fight for their own
lives. Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it. So tonight I
propose a new $600 million program to help an additional 300,000 Americans
receive treatment over the next 3 years.

Our Nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work. One of them
is found at the Healing Place Church in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. A man in the
program said, "God does miracles in people's lives, and you never think it
could be you." Tonight let us bring to all Americans who struggle with drug
addiction this message of hope: The miracle of recovery is possible, and it
could be you.

By caring for children who need mentors and for addicted men and women who need
treatment, we are building a more welcoming society, a culture that values every
life. And in this work, we must not overlook the weakest among us. I ask you to
protect infants at the very hour of their birth and end the practice of
partial-birth abortion. And because no human life should be started or ended as
the object of an experiment, I ask you to set a high standard for humanity and
pass a law against all human cloning.

The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in America also
determine our conduct abroad. The American flag stands for more than our power
and our interests. Our Founders dedicated this country to the cause of human
dignity, the rights of every person, and the possibilities of every life. This
conviction leads us into the world to help the afflicted and defend the peace
and confound the designs of evil men.

In Afghanistan, we helped to liberate an oppressed people. And we will continue
helping them secure their country, rebuild their society, and educate all their
children, boys and girls. In the Middle East, we will continue to seek peace
between a secure Israel and a democratic Palestine. Across the Earth, America is
feeding the hungry. More than 60 percent of international food aid comes as a
gift from the people of the United States. As our Nation moves troops and builds
alliances to make our world safer, we must also remember our calling as a
blessed country is to make the world better.

Today, on the continent of Africa, nearly 30 million people have the AIDS virus,
including 3 million children under the age 15. There are whole countries in
Africa where more than one-third of the adult population carries the infection.
More than 4 million require immediate drug treatment. Yet across that continent,
only 50,000 AIDS victims-- only 50,000--are receiving the medicine they need.

Because the AIDS diagnosis is considered a death sentence, many do not seek
treatment. Almost all who do are turned away. A doctor in rural South Africa
describes his frustration. He says, "We have no medicines. Many hospitals tell
people, 'You've got AIDS. We can't help you. Go home and die.' " In an age of
miraculous medicines, no person should have to hear those words.

AIDS can be prevented. Antiretroviral drugs can extend life for many years. And
the cost of those drugs has dropped from $12,000 a year to under $300 a year,
which places a tremendous possibility within our grasp. Ladies and gentlemen,
seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many.

We have confronted and will continue to confront HIV/AIDS in our own country.
And to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad, tonight I propose the Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief, a work of mercy beyond all current international efforts
to help the people of Africa. This comprehensive plan will prevent 7 million new
AIDS infections, treat at least 2 million people with life-extending drugs, and
provide humane care for millions of people suffering from AIDS and for children
orphaned by AIDS. I ask the Congress to commit $15 billion over the next 5
years, including nearly $10 billion in new money, to turn the tide against AIDS
in the most afflicted nations of Africa and the Caribbean.

This Nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people from a plague of
nature. And this Nation is leading the world in confronting and defeating the
manmade evil of international terrorism.

There are days when our fellow citizens do not hear news about the war on
terror. There's never a day when I do not learn of another threat or receive
reports of operations in progress or give an order in this global war against a
scattered network of killers. The war goes on, and we are winning.

To date, we've arrested or otherwise dealt with many key commanders of Al Qaida.
They include a man who directed logistics and funding for the September the 11th
attacks, the chief of Al Qaida operations in the Persian Gulf who planned the
bombings of our embassies in east Africa and the U.S.S. Cole, an Al Qaida
operations chief from Southeast Asia, a former director of Al Qaida's training
camps in Afghanistan, a key Al Qaida operative in Europe, a major Al Qaida
leader in Yemen. All told, more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have been
arrested in many countries. Many others have met a different fate. Let's put it
this way: They are no longer a problem to the United States and our friends and
allies.

We are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks. America
and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped terrorist conspiracies
targeting the Embassy in Yemen, the American Embassy in Singapore, a Saudi
military base, ships in the Straits of Hormuz and the Straits of Gibraltar.
We've broken Al Qaida cells in Hamburg, Milan, Madrid, London, Paris, as well as
Buffalo, New York.

We have the terrorists on the run. We're keeping them on the run. One by one,
the terrorists are learning the meaning of American justice.

As we fight this war, we will remember where it began: Here, in our own country.
This Government is taking unprecedented measures to protect our people and
defend our homeland. We've intensified security at the borders and ports of
entry, posted more than 50,000 newly trained Federal screeners in airports,
begun inoculating troops and first- responders against smallpox, and are
deploying the Nation's first early warning network of sensors to detect
biological attack. And this year, for the first time, we are beginning to field
a defense to protect this Nation against ballistic missiles.

I thank the Congress for supporting these measures. I ask you tonight to add to
our future security with a major research and production effort to guard our
people against bioterrorism, called Project BioShield. The budget I send you
will propose almost $6 billion to quickly make available effective vaccines and
treatments against agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola, and plague. We
must assume that our enemies would use these diseases as weapons, and we must
act before the dangers are upon us.

Since September the 11th, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have
worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists. The FBI is
improving its ability to analyze intelligence and is transforming itself to meet
new threats. Tonight I am instructing the leaders of the FBI, the CIA, the
Homeland Security, and the Department of Defense to develop a Terrorist Threat
Integration Center, to merge and analyze all threat information in a single
location. Our Government must have the very best information possible, and we
will use it to make sure the right people are in the right places to protect all
our citizens.

Our war against terror is a contest of will in which perseverance is power. In
the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon, on a field in
Pennsylvania, this Nation made a pledge, and we renew that pledge tonight:
Whatever the duration of this struggle and whatever the difficulties, we will
not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs of men; free people will set
the course of history.

Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror, the gravest danger facing
America and the world, is outlaw regimes that seek and possess nuclear,
chemical, and biological weapons. These regimes could use such weapons for
blackmail, terror, and mass murder. They could also give or sell those weapons
to terrorist allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.

This threat is new. America's duty is familiar. Throughout the 20th century,
small groups of men seized control of great nations, built armies and arsenals,
and set out to dominate the weak and intimidate the world. In each case, their
ambitions of cruelty and murder had no limit. In each case, the ambitions of
Hitlerism, militarism, and communism were defeated by the will of free peoples,
by the strength of great alliances, and by the might of the United States of
America.

Now, in this century, the ideology of power and domination has appeared again
and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror. Once again, this Nation and
all our friends are all that stand between a world at peace and a world of chaos
and constant alarm. Once again, we are called to defend the safety of our people
and the hopes of all mankind. And we accept this responsibility.

America is making a broad and determined effort to confront these dangers. We
have called on the United Nations to fulfill its charter and stand by its demand
that Iraq disarm. We're strongly supporting the International Atomic Energy
Agency in its mission to track and control nuclear materials around the world.
We're working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former
Soviet Union and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and
shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction.

In all these efforts, however, America's purpose is more than to follow a
process; it is to achieve a result, the end of terrible threats to the civilized
world. All free nations have a stake in preventing sudden and catastrophic
attacks. And we're asking them to join us, and many are doing so. Yet the course
of this Nation does not depend on the decisions of others. Whatever action is
required, whenever action is necessary, I will defend the freedom and security
of the American people.

Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we continue to see a
Government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass destruction, and
supports terror. We also see Iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as
they speak out for liberty and human rights and democracy. Iranians, like all
people, have a right to choose their own Government and determine their own
destiny, and the United States supports their aspirations to live in freedom.

On the Korean Peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people living in fear and
starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a negotiated
framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons. We now know that
that regime was deceiving the world and developing those weapons all along. And
today the North Korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and
seek concessions. America and the world will not be blackmailed.

America is working with the countries of the region, South Korea, Japan, China,
and Russia, to find a peaceful solution and to show the North Korean Government
that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and
continued hardship. The North Korean regime will find respect in the world and
revival for its people only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions.

Our Nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean Peninsula and not
allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq. A brutal dictator, with a
history of reckless aggression, with ties to terrorism, with great potential
wealth, will not be permitted to dominate a vital region and threaten the United
States.

Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being the last casualty
in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself, he agreed to disarm of all
weapons of mass destruction. For the next 12 years, he systematically violated
that agreement. He pursued chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, even while
inspectors were in his country. Nothing to date has restrained him from his
pursuit of these weapons, not economic sanctions, not isolation from the
civilized world, not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities.

Almost 3 months ago, the United Nations Security Council gave Saddam Hussein his
final chance to disarm. He has shown instead utter contempt for the United
Nations and for the opinion of the world. The 108 U.N. inspectors were sent to
conduct--were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a
country the size of California. The job of the inspectors is to verify that
Iraq's regime is disarming. It is up to Iraq to show exactly where it is hiding
its banned weapons, lay those weapons out for the world to see, and destroy them
as directed. Nothing like this has happened.

The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had biological weapons
sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax, enough doses to kill
several million people. He hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no
evidence that he has destroyed it. The United Nations concluded that Saddam
Hussein had materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum
toxin, enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure. He
hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed
it. Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the materials to
produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard, and VX nerve agent. In such
quantities, these chemical agents could also kill untold thousands. He's not
accounted for these materials. He has given no evidence that he has destroyed
them. U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of 30,000
munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors recently turned up
16 of them, despite Iraq's recent declaration denying their existence. Saddam
Hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited
munitions. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed them.

From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several
mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to produce germ warfare
agents and can be moved from place to a place to evade inspectors. Saddam
Hussein has not disclosed these facilities. He's given no evidence that he has
destroyed them.

The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that Saddam
Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a
nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium
for a bomb. The British Government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently
sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa. Our intelligence sources
tell us that he has attempted to purchase high-strength aluminum tubes suitable
for nuclear weapons production. Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these
activities. He clearly has much to hide.

The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary, he is deceiving. From
intelligence sources we know, for instance, that thousands of Iraqi security
personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from the U.N. inspectors,
sanitizing inspection sites, and monitoring the inspectors themselves. Iraqi
officials accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses.

Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights requested by the United Nations. Iraqi
intelligence officers are posing as the scientists inspectors are supposed to
interview. Real scientists have been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say.
Intelligence sources indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists
who cooperate with U.N. inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed, along with
their families.

Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, spent enormous
sums, taken great risks to build and keep weapons of mass destruction. But why?
The only possible explanation, the only possible use he could have for those
weapons, is to dominate, intimidate, or attack.

With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological weapons, Saddam
Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the Middle East and create
deadly havoc in that region. And this Congress and the American people must
recognize another threat. Evidence from intelligence sources, secret
communications, and statements by people now in custody reveal that Saddam
Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaida. Secretly
and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to
terrorists or help them develop their own.

Before September the 11th, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could
be contained. But chemical agents, lethal viruses, and shadowy terrorist
networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons
and other plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one
canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none
we have ever known. We will do everything in our power to make sure that that
day never comes.

Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent. Since when have
terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us on notice
before they strike? If this threat is permitted to fully and suddenly emerge,
all actions, all words, and all recriminations would come too late. Trusting in
the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an
option.

The dictator who is assembling the world's most dangerous weapons has already
used them on whole villages, leaving thousands of his own citizens dead, blind,
or disfigured. Iraqi refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained, by
torturing children while their parents are made to watch. International human
rights groups have cataloged other methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq:
electric shock, burning with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation
with electric drills, cutting out tongues, and rape. If this is not evil, then
evil has no meaning.

And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed people of Iraq: Your
enemy is not surrounding your country; your enemy is ruling your country. And
the day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your
liberation.

The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will not accept a
serious and mounting threat to our country and our friends and our allies. The
United States will ask the U.N. Security Council to convene on February the 5th
to consider the facts of Iraq's ongoing defiance of the world. Secretary of
State Powell will present information and intelligence about Iraqi's
legal--Iraq's illegal weapons programs, its attempt to hide those weapons from
inspectors, and its links to terrorist groups.

We will consult. But let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does
not fully disarm, for the safety of our people and for the peace of the world,
we will lead a coalition to disarm him.

Tonight I have a message for the men and women who will keep the peace, members
of the American Armed Forces: Many of you are assembling in or near the Middle
East, and some crucial hours may lay ahead. In those hours, the success of our
cause will depend on you. Your training has prepared you. Your honor will guide
you. You believe in America, and America believes in you.

Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a President can
make. The technologies of war have changed; the risks and suffering of war have
not. For the brave Americans who bear the risk, no victory is free from sorrow.
This Nation fights reluctantly, because we know the cost and we dread the days
of mourning that always come.

We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must be defended. A
future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at all. If war is
forced upon us, we will fight in a just cause and by just means, sparing, in
every way we can, the innocent. And if war is forced upon us, we will fight with
the full force and might of the United States military, and we will prevail.

And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan, we will bring to
the Iraqi people food and medicines and supplies and freedom.

Many challenges, abroad and at home, have arrived in a single season. In 2
years, America has gone from a sense of invulnerability to an awareness of
peril, from bitter division in small matters to calm unity in great causes. And
we go forward with confidence, because this call of history has come to the
right country.

Americans are a resolute people who have risen to every test of our time.
Adversity has revealed the character of our country, to the world and to
ourselves. America is a strong nation and honorable in the use of our strength.
We exercise power without conquest, and we sacrifice for the liberty of
strangers.

Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the right of every person
and the future of every nation. The liberty we prize is not America's gift to
the world, it is God's gift to humanity.

We Americans have faith in ourselves, but not in ourselves alone. We do not
know--we do not claim to know all the ways of providence, yet we can trust in
them, placing our confidence in the loving God behind all of life and all of
history.

May He guide us now. And may God continue to bless the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests,
and fellow citizens: America this evening is a nation called to great
responsibilities, and we are rising to meet them.

As we gather tonight, hundreds of thousands of American service men and women
are deployed across the world in the war on terror. By bringing hope to the
oppressed and delivering justice to the violent, they are making America more
secure.

Each day, law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers are tracking
terrorist threats; analysts are examining airline passenger lists; the men and
women of our new Homeland Security Department are patrolling our coasts and
borders. And their vigilance is protecting America.

Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the world.
The American economy is growing stronger. The tax relief you passed is working.

Tonight Members of Congress can take pride in the great works of compassion and
reform that skeptics had thought impossible. You're raising the standards for
our public schools, and you are giving our senior citizens prescription drug
coverage under Medicare.

We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We can go
forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the dangerous
illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to
us. We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare,
or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.

We've not come all this way, through tragedy and trial and war, only to falter
and leave our work unfinished. Americans are rising to the tasks of history, and
they expect the same from us. In their efforts, their enterprise, and their
character, the American people are showing that the state of our Union is
confident and strong.

Our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the American people.
Twenty-eight months have passed since September the 11th, 2001-- over 2 years
without an attack on American soil. And it is tempting to believe that the
danger is behind us. That hope is understandable, comforting--and false. The
killing has continued in Bali, Jakarta, Casablanca, Riyadh, Mombasa, Jerusalem,
Istanbul, and Baghdad. The terrorists continue to plot against America and the
civilized world. And by our will and courage, this danger will be defeated.

Inside the United States, where the war began, we must continue to give our
homeland security and law enforcement personnel every tool they need to defend
us. And one of those essential tools is the PATRIOT Act, which allows Federal
law enforcement to better share information to track terrorists, to disrupt
their cells, and to seize their assets. For years, we have used similar
provisions to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers. If these methods are good
for hunting criminals, they are even more important for hunting terrorists.

Key provisions of the PATRIOT Act are set to expire next year. The terrorist
threat will not expire on that schedule. Our law enforcement needs this vital
legislation to protect our citizens. You need to renew the PATRIOT Act.

America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war. Last
March, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, a mastermind of September the 11th, awoke to find
himself in the custody of U.S. and Pakistani authorities. Last August the 11th
brought the capture of the terrorist Hambali, who was a key player in the attack
in Indonesia that killed over 200 people. We're tracking Al Qaida around the
world, and nearly two-thirds of their known leaders have now been captured or
killed. Thousands of very skilled and determined military personnel are on the
manhunt, going after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one
by one, we will bring these terrorists to justice.

As part of the offensive against terror, we are also confronting the regimes
that harbor and support terrorists and could supply them with nuclear, chemical,
or biological weapons. The United States and our allies are determined: We
refuse to live in the shadow of this ultimate danger.

The first to see our determination were the Taliban, who made Afghanistan the
primary training base of Al Qaida killers. As of this month, that country has a
new constitution guaranteeing free elections and full participation by women.
Businesses are opening. Health care centers are being established, and the boys
and girls of Afghanistan are back in school. With the help from the new Afghan
army, our coalition is leading aggressive raids against the surviving members of
the Taliban and Al Qaida. The men and women of Afghanistan are building a nation
that is free and proud and fighting terror, and America is honored to be their
friend.

Since we last met in this Chamber, combat forces of the United States, Great
Britain, Australia, Poland, and other countries enforced the demands of the
United Nations, ended the rule of Saddam Hussein, and the people of Iraq are
free.

Having broken the Ba'athist regime, we face a remnant of violent Saddam
supporters. Men who ran away from our troops in battle are now dispersed and
attack from the shadows. These killers, joined by foreign terrorists, are a
serious, continuing danger. Yet we're making progress against them. The once
all-powerful ruler of Iraq was found in a hole and now sits in a prison cell. Of
the top 55 officials of the former regime, we have captured or killed 45. Our
forces are on the offensive, leading over 1,600 patrols a day and conducting an
average of 180 raids a week. We are dealing with these thugs in Iraq just as
surely as we dealt with Saddam Hussein's evil regime.

The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right. And America has always
been willing to do what it takes for what is right. Last January, Iraq's only
law was the whim of one brutal man. Today, our coalition is working with the
Iraqi Governing Council to draft a basic law with a bill of rights. We're
working with Iraqis and the United Nations to prepare for a transition to full
Iraqi sovereignty by the end of June.

As democracy takes hold in Iraq, the enemies of freedom will do all in their
power to spread violence and fear. They are trying to shake the will of our
country and our friends, but the United States of America will never be
intimidated by thugs and assassins. The killers will fail, and the Iraqi people
will live in freedom.

Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own security
and their own future. And tonight we are honored to welcome one of Iraq's most
respected leaders, the current President of the Iraqi Governing Council, Adnan
Pachachi.

Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build a free and
peaceful nation.

Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is changing for the
better. Last month, the leader of Libya voluntarily pledged to disclose and
dismantle all of his regime's weapons of mass destruction programs, including a
uranium enrichment project for nuclear weapons. Colonel Qadhafi correctly judged
that his country would be better off and far more secure without weapons of mass
murder.

Nine months of intense negotiations involving the United States and Great
Britain succeeded with Libya, while 12 years of diplomacy with Iraq did not. And
one reason is clear: For diplomacy to be effective, words must be credible, and
no one can now doubt the word of America.

Different threats require different strategies. Along with nations in the
region, we're insisting that North Korea eliminate its nuclear program. America
and the international community are demanding that Iran meet its commitments and
not develop nuclear weapons. America is committed to keeping the world's most
dangerous weapons out of the hands of the most dangerous regimes.

When I came to this rostrum on September the 20th, 2001, I brought the police
shield of a fallen officer, my reminder of lives that ended and a task that does
not end. I gave to you and to all Americans my complete commitment to securing
our country and defeating our enemies. And this pledge, given by one, has been
kept by many.

You in the Congress have provided the resources for our defense and cast the
difficult votes of war and peace. Our closest allies have been unwavering.
America's intelligence personnel and diplomats have been skilled and tireless.
And the men and women of the American military-- they have taken the hardest
duty. We've seen their skill and their courage in armored charges and midnight
raids and lonely hours on faithful watch. We have seen the joy when they return
and felt the sorrow when one is lost. I've had the honor of meeting our service
men and women at many posts, from the deck of a carrier in the Pacific to a mess
hall in Baghdad.

Many of our troops are listening tonight, and I want you and your families to
know: America is proud of you. And my administration and this Congress will give
you the resources you need to fight and win the war on terror.

I know that some people question if America is really in a war at all. They view
terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved mainly with law enforcement
and indictments. After the World Trade Center was first attacked in 1993, some
of the guilty were indicted and tried and convicted and sent to prison. But the
matter was not settled. The terrorists were still training and plotting in other
nations and drawing up more ambitious plans. After the chaos and carnage of
September the 11th, it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers. The
terrorists and their supporters declared war on the United States, and war is
what they got.

Some in this Chamber and in our country did not support the liberation of Iraq.
Objections to war often come from principled motives, but let us be candid about
the consequences of leaving Saddam Hussein in power. We're seeking all the
facts. Already, the Kay Report identified dozens of
weapons-of-mass-destruction-related program activities and significant amounts
of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United Nations. Had we failed to act,
the dictator's weapons of mass destruction programs would continue to this day.
Had we failed to act, Security Council resolutions on Iraq would have been
revealed as empty threats, weakening the United Nations and encouraging defiance
by dictators around the world. Iraq's torture chambers would still be filled
with victims, terrified and innocent. The killing fields of Iraq, where hundreds
of thousands of men and women and children vanished into the sands, would still
be known only to the killers. For all who love freedom and peace, the world
without Saddam Hussein's regime is a better and safer place.

Some critics have said our duties in Iraq must be internationalized. This
particular criticism is hard to explain to our partners in Britain, Australia,
Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, Italy, Spain, Poland, Denmark,
Hungary, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Romania, the Netherlands, Norway, El Salvador, and
the 17 other countries that have committed troops to Iraq. As we debate at home,
we must never ignore the vital contributions of our international partners or
dismiss their sacrifices.

From the beginning, America has sought international support for our operations
in Afghanistan and Iraq, and we have gained much support. There is a difference,
however, between leading a coalition of many nations and submitting to the
objections of a few. America will never seek a permission slip to defend the
security of our country.

We also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the greater Middle
East, where freedom is rare. Yet it is mistaken and condescending to assume that
whole cultures and great religions are incompatible with liberty and
self-government. I believe that God has planted in every human heart the desire
to live in freedom. And even when that desire is crushed by tyranny for decades,
it will rise again.

As long as the Middle East remains a place of tyranny and despair and anger, it
will continue to produce men and movements that threaten the safety of America
and our friends. So America is pursuing a forward strategy of freedom in the
greater Middle East. We will challenge the enemies of reform, confront the
allies of terror, and expect a higher standard from our friend. To cut through
the barriers of hateful propaganda, the Voice of America and other broadcast
services are expanding their programming in Arabic and Persian, and soon a new
television service will begin providing reliable news and information across the
region. I will send you a proposal to double the budget of the National
Endowment for Democracy and to focus its new work on the development of free
elections and free markets, free press, and free labor unions in the Middle
East. And above all, we will finish the historic work of democracy in
Afghanistan and Iraq so those nations can light the way for others and help
transform a troubled part of the world.

America is a nation with a mission, and that mission comes from our most basic
beliefs. We have no desire to dominate, no ambitions of empire. Our aim is a
democratic peace, a peace founded upon the dignity and rights of every man and
woman. America acts in this cause with friends and allies at our side, yet we
understand our special calling: This great Republic will lead the cause of
freedom.

In the last 3 years, adversity has also revealed the fundamental strengths of
the American economy. We have come through recession and terrorist attack and
corporate scandals and the uncertainties of war. And because you acted to
stimulate our economy with tax relief, this economy is strong and growing
stronger.

You have doubled the child tax credit from 500 to $1,000, reduced the marriage
penalty, begun to phase out the death tax, reduced taxes on capital gains and
stock dividends, cut taxes on small businesses, and you have lowered taxes for
every American who pays income taxes.

Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving this economy forward.
The pace of economic growth in the third quarter of 2003 was the fastest in
nearly 20 years; new home construction, the highest in almost 20 years;
homeownership rates, the highest ever. Manufacturing activity is increasing.
Inflation is low. Interest rates are low. Exports are growing. Productivity is
high, and jobs are on the rise. These numbers confirm that the American people
are using their money far better than Government would have, and you were right
to return it.

America's growing economy is also a changing economy. As technology transforms
the way almost every job is done, America becomes more productive, and workers
need new skills. Much of our job growth will be found in high-skilled fields
like health care and biotechnology. So we must respond by helping more Americans
gain the skills to find good jobs in our new economy.

All skills begin with the basics of reading and math, which are supposed to be
learned in the early grades of our schools. Yet for too long, for too many
children, those skills were never mastered. By passing the No Child Left Behind
Act, you have made the expectation of literacy the law of our country. We're
providing more funding for our schools, a 36-percent increase since 2001. We're
requiring higher standards. We are regularly testing every child on the
fundamentals. We are reporting results to parents and making sure they have
better options when schools are not performing. We are making progress toward
excellence for every child in America.

But the status quo always has defenders. Some want to undermine the No Child
Left Behind Act by weakening standards and accountability. Yet the results we
require are really a matter of common sense: We expect third graders to read and
do math at the third grade level, and that's not asking too much. Testing is the
only way to identify and help students who are falling behind. This Nation will
not go back to the days of simply shuffling children along from grade to grade
without them learning the basics. I refuse to give up on any child, and the No
Child Left Behind Act is opening the door of opportunity to all of America's
children.

At the same time, we must ensure that older students and adults can gain the
skills they need to find work now. Many of the fastest growing occupations
require strong math and science preparation and training beyond the high school
level. So tonight, I propose a series of measures called Jobs for the 21st
Century. This program will provide extra help to middle and high school students
who fall behind in reading and math, expand advanced placement programs in
low-income schools, invite math and science professionals from the private
sector to teach part-time in our high schools. I propose larger Pell grants for
students who prepare for college with demanding courses in high school. I
propose increasing our support for America's fine community colleges, so they
can--I do so, so they can train workers for industries that are creating the
most new jobs. By all these actions, we'll help more and more Americans to join
in the growing prosperity of our country. Job training is important, and so is
job creation. We must continue to pursue an aggressive, progrowth economic
agenda.

Congress has some unfinished business on the issue of taxes. The tax reductions
you passed are set to expire. Unless you act, the unfair tax on marriage will go
back up. Unless you act, millions of families will be charged $300 more in
Federal taxes for every child. Unless you act, small businesses will pay higher
taxes. Unless you act, the death tax will eventually come back to life. Unless
you act, Americans face a tax increase. What Congress has given, the Congress
should not take away. For the sake of job growth, the tax cuts you passed should
be permanent.

Our agenda for jobs and growth must help small-business owners and employees
with relief from needless Federal regulation and protect them from junk and
frivolous lawsuits.

Consumers and businesses need reliable supplies of energy to make our economy
run, so I urge you to pass legislation to modernize our electricity system,
promote conservation, and make America less dependent on foreign sources of
energy.

My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new markets for
America's entrepreneurs and manufacturers and farmers, to create jobs for
American workers. Younger workers should have the opportunity to build a nest
egg by saving part of their Social Security taxes in a personal retirement
account. We should make the Social Security system a source of ownership for the
American people. And we should limit the burden of Government on this economy by
acting as good stewards of taxpayers' dollars.

In 2 weeks, I will send you a budget that funds the war, protects the homeland,
and meets important domestic needs while limiting the growth in discretionary
spending to less than 4 percent. This will require that Congress focus on
priorities, cut wasteful spending, and be wise with the people's money. By doing
so, we can cut the deficit in half over the next 5 years.

Tonight I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect our values
and benefit our economy. I propose a new temporary- worker program to match
willing foreign workers with willing employers when no Americans can be found to
fill the job. This reform will be good for our economy because employers will
find needed workers in an honest and orderly system. A temporary-worker program
will help protect our homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to
focus on true threats to our national security.

I oppose amnesty, because it would encourage further illegal immigration and
unfairly reward those who break our laws. My temporary- worker program will
preserve the citizenship path for those who respect the law while bringing
millions of hard-working men and women out from the shadows of American life.

Our Nation's health care system, like our economy, is also in a time of change.
Amazing medical technologies are improving and saving lives. This dramatic
progress has brought its own challenge, in the rising costs of medical care and
health insurance. Members of Congress, we must work together to help control
those costs and extend the benefits of modern medicine throughout our country.

Meeting these goals requires bipartisan effort, and 2 months ago, you showed the
way. By strengthening Medicare and adding a prescription drug benefit, you kept
a basic commitment to our seniors. You are giving them the modern medicine they
deserve.

Starting this year, under the law you passed, seniors can choose to receive a
drug discount card, saving them 10 to 25 percent off the retail price of most
prescription drugs, and millions of low-income seniors can get an additional
$600 to buy medicine. Beginning next year, seniors will have new coverage for
preventive screenings against diabetes and heart disease, and seniors just
entering Medicare can receive wellness exams.

In January of 2006, seniors can get prescription drug coverage under Medicare.
For a monthly premium of about $35, most seniors who do not have that coverage
today can expect to see their drug bills cut roughly in half. Under this reform,
senior citizens will be able to keep their Medicare just as it is, or they can
choose a Medicare plan that fits them best, just as you, as Members of Congress,
can choose an insurance plan that meets your needs. And starting this year,
millions of Americans will be able to save money tax-free for their medical
expenses in a health savings account.

I signed this measure proudly, and any attempt to limit the choices of our
seniors or to take away their prescription drug coverage under Medicare will
meet my veto.

On the critical issue of health care, our goal is to ensure that Americans can
choose and afford private health care coverage that best fits their individual
needs. To make insurance more affordable, Congress must act to address rapidly
rising health care costs. Small businesses should be able to band together and
negotiate for lower insurance rates, so they can cover more workers with health
insurance. I urge you to pass association health plans. I ask you to give lower
income Americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their
own basic health insurance.

By computerizing health records, we can avoid dangerous medical mistakes, reduce
costs, and improve care. To protect the doctor-patient relationship and keep
good doctors doing good work, we must eliminate wasteful and frivolous medical
lawsuits. And tonight I propose that individuals who buy catastrophic health
care coverage as part of our new health savings accounts be allowed to deduct
100 percent of the premiums from their taxes.

A Government-run health care system is the wrong prescription. By keeping costs
under control, expanding access, and helping more Americans afford coverage, we
will preserve the system of private medicine that makes America's health care
the best in the world.

We are living in a time of great change in our world, in our economy, in science
and medicine. Yet some things endure: courage and compassion, reverence and
integrity, respect for differences of faith and race. The values we try to live
by never change, and they are instilled in us by fundamental institutions such
as families and schools and religious congregations. These institutions, these
unseen pillars of civilization, must remain strong in America, and we will
defend them. We must stand with our families to help them raise healthy,
responsible children. When it comes to helping children make right choices,
there is work for all of us to do.

One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their lives and
futures on drugs. Our Government is helping parents confront this problem with
aggressive education, treatment, and law enforcement. Drug use in high school
has declined by 11 percent over the last 2 years. Four hundred thousand fewer
young people are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001. In my budget, I
propose new funding to continue our aggressive, community-based strategy to
reduce demand for illegal drugs. Drug testing in our schools has proven to be an
effective part of this effort. So tonight I propose an additional 23 million for
schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save children's lives. The
aim here is not to punish children but to send them this message: We love you,
and we do not want to lose you.

To help children make right choices, they need good examples. Athletics play
such an important role in our society, but unfortunately, some in professional
sports are not setting much of an example. The use of performance-enhancing
drugs like steroids in baseball, football, and other sports is dangerous, and it
sends the wrong message, that there are shortcuts to accomplishment and that
performance is more important than character. So tonight I call on team owners,
union representatives, coaches, and players to take the lead, to send the right
signal, to get tough, and to get rid of steroids now.

To encourage right choices, we must be willing to confront the dangers young
people face, even when they're difficult to talk about. Each year, about 3
million teenagers contract sexually transmitted diseases that can harm them or
kill them or prevent them from ever becoming parents. In my budget, I propose a
grassroots campaign to help inform families about these medical risks. We will
double Federal funding for abstinence programs, so schools can teach this fact
of life: Abstinence for young people is the only certain way to avoid sexually
transmitted diseases.

Decisions children now make can affect their health and character for the rest
of their lives. All of us, parents and schools and government, must work
together to counter the negative influence of the culture and to send the right
messages to our children.

A strong America must also value the institution of marriage. I believe we
should respect individuals as we take a principled stand for one of the most
fundamental, enduring institutions of our civilization. Congress has already
taken a stand on this issue by passing the Defense of Marriage Act, signed in
1996 by President Clinton. That statute protects marriage under Federal law as a
union of a man and a woman and declares that one State may not redefine marriage
for other States.

Activist judges, however, have begun redefining marriage by court order, without
regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives. On an issue
of such great consequence, the people's voice must be heard. If judges insist on
forcing their arbitrary will upon the people, the only alternative left to the
people would be the constitutional process. Our Nation must defend the sanctity
of marriage.

The outcome of this debate is important, and so is the way we conduct it. The
same moral tradition that defines marriage also teaches that each individual has
dignity and value in God's sight.

It's also important to strengthen our communities by unleashing the compassion
of America's religious institutions. Religious charities of every creed are
doing some of the most vital work in our country: mentoring children, feeding
the hungry, taking the hand of the lonely. Yet Government has often denied
social service grants and contracts to these groups, just because they have a
cross or a Star of David or a crescent on the wall.

By Executive order, I have opened billions of dollars in grant money to
competition that includes faith-based charities. Tonight I ask you to codify
this into law, so people of faith can know that the law will never discriminate
against them again.

In the past, we've worked together to bring mentors to children of prisoners and
provide treatment for the addicted and help for the homeless. Tonight I ask you
to consider another group of Americans in need of help. This year, some 600,000
inmates will be released from prison back into society. We know from long
experience that if they can't find work or a home or help, they are much more
likely to commit crime and return to prison. So tonight I propose a 4-year, $300
million prisoner reentry initiative to expand job training and placement
services, to provide transitional housing, and to help newly released prisoners
get mentoring, including from faith-based groups. America is the land of second
chance, and when the gates of the prison open, the path ahead should lead to a
better life.

For all Americans, the last 3 years have brought tests we did not ask for and
achievements shared by all. By our actions, we have shown what kind of nation we
are. In grief, we have found the grace to go on. In challenge, we rediscovered
the courage and daring of a free people. In victory, we have shown the noble
aims and good heart of America. And having come this far, we sense that we live
in a time set apart.

I've been witness to the character of the people of America, who have shown calm
in times of danger, compassion for one another, and toughness for the long haul.
All of us have been partners in a great enterprise. And even some of the
youngest understand that we are living in historic times. Last month a girl in
Lincoln, Rhode Island, sent me a letter. It began, "Dear George W. Bush. If
there's anything you know I, Ashley Pearson, age 10, can do to help anyone,
please send me a letter and tell me what I can do to save our country." She
added this P.S.: "If you can send a letter to the troops, please put, 'Ashley
Pearson believes in you.' " Tonight, Ashley, your message to our troops has
just been conveyed. And yes, you have some duties yourself: Study hard in
school; listen to your mom or dad; help someone in need; and when you and your
friends see a man or woman in uniform, say, "Thank you." And Ashley, while you
do your part, all of us here in this great Chamber will do our best to keep you
and the rest of America safe and free.

My fellow citizens, we now move forward with confidence and faith. Our Nation is
strong and steadfast. The cause we serve is right, because it is the cause of
all mankind. The momentum of freedom in our world is unmistakable, and it is not
carried forward by our power alone. We can trust in that greater power who
guides the unfolding of the years. And in all that is to come, we can know that
His purposes are just and true.

May God continue to bless America.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, fellow citizens:

As a new Congress gathers, all of us in the elected branches of Government share
a great privilege: We've been placed in office by the votes of the people we
serve. And tonight that is a privilege we share with newly elected leaders of
Afghanistan, the Palestinian Territories, Ukraine, and a free and sovereign
Iraq.

Two weeks ago, I stood on the steps of this Capitol and renewed the commitment
of our Nation to the guiding ideal of liberty for all. This evening I will set
forth policies to advance that ideal at home and around the world.

Tonight, with a healthy, growing economy, with more Americans going back to
work, with our Nation an active force for good in the world, the state of our
Union is confident and strong.

Our generation has been blessed by the expansion of opportunity, by advances in
medicine, by the security purchased by our parents' sacrifice. Now, as we see a
little gray in the mirror--or a lot of gray--(laughter)--and we watch our
children moving into adulthood, we ask the question: What will be the state of
their Union? Members of Congress, the choices we make together will answer that
question. Over the next several months, on issue after issue, let us do what
Americans have always done and build a better world for our children and our
grandchildren.

First, we must be good stewards of this economy and renew the great institutions
on which millions of our fellow citizens rely. America's economy is the fastest
growing of any major industrialized nation. In the past 4 years, we've provided
tax relief to every person who pays income taxes, overcome a recession, opened
up new markets abroad, prosecuted corporate criminals, raised homeownership to
its highest level in history. And in the last year alone, the United States has
added 2.3 million new jobs. When action was needed, the Congress delivered, and
the Nation is grateful.

Now we must add to these achievements. By making our economy more flexible, more
innovative, and more competitive, we will keep America the economic leader of
the world.

America's prosperity requires restraining the spending appetite of the Federal
Government. I welcome the bipartisan enthusiasm for spending discipline. I will
send you a budget that holds the growth of discretionary spending below
inflation, makes tax relief permanent, and stays on track to cut the deficit in
half by 2009. My budget substantially reduces or eliminates more than 150
Government programs that are not getting results or duplicate current efforts or
do not fulfill essential priorities. The principle here is clear: Taxpayer
dollars must be spent wisely or not at all.

To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must prepare a rising
generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under the No Child Left Behind
Act, standards are higher, test scores are on the rise, and we're closing the
achievement gap for minority students. Now we must demand better results from
our high schools, so every high school diploma is a ticket to success. We will
help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career by
reforming our job training system and strengthening America's community
colleges. And we'll make it easier for Americans to afford a college education
by increasing the size of Pell grants.

To make our economy stronger and more competitive, America must reward, not
punish, the efforts and dreams of entrepreneurs. Small business is the path of
advancement, especially for women and minorities, so we must free small
businesses from needless regulation and protect honest job-creators from junk
lawsuits. Justice is distorted and our economy is held back by irresponsible
class actions and frivolous asbestos claims, and I urge Congress to pass legal
reforms this year.

To make our economy stronger and more productive, we must make health care more
affordable and give families greater access to good coverage and more control
over their health decisions. I ask Congress to move forward on a comprehensive
health care agenda with tax credits to help low-income workers buy insurance, a
community health center in every poor county, improved information technology to
prevent medical error and needless costs, association health plans for small
businesses and their employees, expanded health savings accounts, and medical
liability reform that will reduce health care costs and make sure patients have
the doctors and care they need.

To keep our economy growing, we also need reliable supplies of affordable,
environmentally responsible energy. Nearly 4 years ago, I submitted a
comprehensive energy strategy that encourages conservation, alternative sources,
a modernized electricity grid, and more production here at home, including safe,
clean nuclear energy. My Clear Skies legislation will cut powerplant pollution
and improve the health of our citizens. And my budget provides strong funding
for leading-edge technology, from hydrogen-fueled cars to clean coal to
renewable sources such as ethanol. Four years of debate is enough. I urge
Congress to pass legislation that makes America more secure and less dependent
on foreign energy.

All these proposals are essential to expand this economy and add new jobs, but
they are just the beginning of our duty. To build the prosperity of future
generations, we must update institutions that were created to meet the needs of
an earlier time. Year after year, Americans are burdened by an archaic,
incoherent Federal Tax Code. I've appointed a bipartisan panel to examine the
Tax Code from top to bottom. And when their recommendations are delivered, you
and I will work together to give this Nation a Tax Code that is progrowth, easy
to understand, and fair to all.

America's immigration system is also outdated, unsuited to the needs of our
economy and to the values of our country. We should not be content with laws
that punish hardworking people who want only to provide for their families and
deny businesses willing workers and invite chaos at our border. It is time for
an immigration policy that permits temporary guest workers to fill jobs
Americans will not take, that rejects amnesty, that tells us who is entering and
leaving our country, and that closes the border to drug dealers and terrorists.

One of America's most important institutions, a symbol of the trust between
generations, is also in need of wise and effective reform. Social Security was a
great moral success of the 20th century, and we must honor its great purposes in
this new century. The system, however, on its current path, is headed toward
bankruptcy. And so we must join together to strengthen and save Social Security.

Today, more than 45 million Americans receive Social Security benefits, and
millions more are nearing retirement. And for them the system is sound and
fiscally strong. I have a message for every American who is 55 or older: Do not
let anyone mislead you; for you, the Social Security system will not change in
any way.

For younger workers, the Social Security system has serious problems that will
grow worse with time. Social Security was created decades ago for a very
different era. In those days, people did not live as long. Benefits were much
lower than they are today. And a half century ago, about 16 workers paid into
the system for each person drawing benefits.

Our society has changed in ways the founders of Social Security could not have
foreseen. In today's world, people are living longer and, therefore, drawing
benefits longer. And those benefits are scheduled to rise dramatically over the
next few decades. And instead of 16 workers paying in for every beneficiary,
right now it's only about 3 workers. And over the next few decades, that number
will fall to just 2 workers per beneficiary. With each passing year, fewer
workers are paying ever- higher benefits to an ever-larger number of retirees.

So here is the result: Thirteen years from now, in 2018, Social Security will be
paying out more than it takes in. And every year afterward will bring a new
shortfall, bigger than the year before. For example, in the year 2027, the
Government will somehow have to come up with an extra $200 billion to keep the
system afloat, and by 2033, the annual shortfall would be more than $300
billion. By the year 2042, the entire system would be exhausted and bankrupt. If
steps are not taken to avert that outcome, the only solutions would be
dramatically higher taxes, massive new borrowing, or sudden and severe cuts in
Social Security benefits or other Government programs.

I recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem a long way off. But those dates are not
so distant, as any parent will tell you. If you have a 5- year-old, you're
already concerned about how you'll pay for college tuition 13 years down the
road. If you've got children in their twenties, as some of us do, the idea of
Social Security collapsing before they retire does not seem like a small matter.
And it should not be a small matter to the United States Congress. You and I
share a responsibility. We must pass reforms that solve the financial problems
of Social Security once and for all.

Fixing Social Security permanently will require an open, candid review of the
options. Some have suggested limiting benefits for wealthy retirees. Former
Congressman Tim Penny has raised the possibility of indexing benefits to prices
rather than wages. During the 1990s, my predecessor, President Clinton, spoke of
increasing the retirement age. Former Senator John Breaux suggested discouraging
early collection of Social Security benefits. The late Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan recommended changing the way benefits are calculated. All these ideas
are on the table.

I know that none of these reforms would be easy. But we have to move ahead with
courage and honesty, because our children's retirement security is more
important than partisan politics. I will work with Members of Congress to find
the most effective combination of reforms. I will listen to anyone who has a
good idea to offer. We must, however, be guided by some basic principles. We
must make Social Security permanently sound, not leave that task for another
day. We must not jeopardize our economic strength by increasing payroll taxes.
We must ensure that lower income Americans get the help they need to have
dignity and peace of mind in their retirement. We must guarantee there is no
change for those now retired or nearing retirement. And we must take care that
any changes in the system are gradual, so younger workers have years to prepare
and plan for their future.

As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to make the system a
better deal for younger workers. And the best way to reach that goal is through
voluntary personal retirement accounts. Here is how the idea works. Right now, a
set portion of the money you earn is taken out of your paycheck to pay for the
Social Security benefits of today's retirees. If you're a younger worker, I
believe you should be able to set aside part of that money in your own
retirement account, so you can build a nest egg for your own future.

Here's why the personal accounts are a better deal. Your money will grow over
time at a greater rate than anything the current system can deliver, and your
account will provide money for retirement over and above the check you will
receive from Social Security. In addition, you'll be able to pass along the
money that accumulates in your personal account, if you wish, to your children
and--or grandchildren. And best of all, the money in the account is yours, and
the Government can never take it away.

The goal here is greater security in retirement, so we will set careful
guidelines for personal accounts. We'll make sure the money can only go into a
conservative mix of bonds and stock funds. We'll make sure that your earnings
are not eaten up by hidden Wall Street fees. We'll make sure there are good
options to protect your investments from sudden market swings on the eve of your
retirement. We'll make sure a personal account cannot be emptied out all at once
but rather paid out over time as an addition to traditional Social Security
benefits. And we'll make sure this plan is fiscally responsible by starting
personal retirement accounts gradually and raising the yearly limits on
contributions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set aside 4
percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.

Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to Federal employees, because
you already have something similar called the Thrift Savings Plan, which lets
workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into any of five different broadly
based investment funds. It's time to extend the same security and choice and
ownership to young Americans.

Our second great responsibility to our children and grandchildren is to honor
and to pass along the values that sustain a free society. So many of my
generation, after a long journey, have come home to family and faith and are
determined to bring up responsible, moral children. Government is not the source
of these values, but Government should never undermine them.

Because marriage is a sacred institution and the foundation of society, it
should not be redefined by activist judges. For the good of families, children,
and society, I support a constitutional amendment to protect the institution of
marriage.

Because a society is measured by how it treats the weak and vulnerable, we must
strive to build a culture of life. Medical research can help us reach that goal
by developing treatments and cures that save lives and help people overcome
disabilities, and I thank the Congress for doubling the funding of the National
Institutes of Health.

To build a culture of life, we must also ensure that scientific advances always
serve human dignity, not take advantage of some lives for the benefit of others.
We should all be able to agree on some clear standards. I will work with
Congress to ensure that human embryos are not created for experimentation or
grown for body parts and that human life is never bought or sold as a commodity.
America will continue to lead the world in medical research that is ambitious,
aggressive, and always ethical.

Because courts must always deliver impartial justice, judges have a duty to
faithfully interpret the law, not legislate from the bench. As President, I have
a constitutional responsibility to nominate men and women who understand the
role of courts in our democracy and are well- qualified to serve on the bench,
and I have done so. The Constitution also gives the Senate a responsibility:
Every judicial nominee deserves an up-or-down vote.

Because one of the deepest values of our country is compassion, we must never
turn away from any citizen who feels isolated from the opportunities of America.
Our Government will continue to support faith-based and community groups that
bring hope to harsh places. Now we need to focus on giving young people,
especially young men in our cities, better options than apathy or gangs or jail.
Tonight I propose a 3-year initiative to help organizations keep young people
out of gangs and show young men an ideal of manhood that respects women and
rejects violence. Taking on gang life will be one part of a broader outreach to
at-risk youth, which involves parents and pastors, coaches and community leaders
in programs ranging from literacy to sports. And I am proud that the leader of
this nationwide effort will be our First Lady, Laura Bush.

Because HIV/AIDS brings suffering and fear into so many lives, I ask you to
reauthorize the Ryan White Act to encourage prevention and provide care and
treatment to the victims of that disease. And as we update this important law,
we must focus our efforts on fellow citizens with the highest rates of new
cases, African American men and women.

Because one of the main sources of our national unity is our belief in equal
justice, we need to make sure Americans of all races and backgrounds have
confidence in the system that provides justice. In America, we must make doubly
sure no person is held to account for a crime he or she did not commit, so we
are dramatically expanding the use of DNA evidence to prevent wrongful
conviction. Soon I will send to Congress a proposal to fund special training for
defense counsel in capital cases, because people on trial for their lives must
have competent lawyers by their side.

Our third responsibility to future generations is to leave them an America that
is safe from danger and protected by peace. We will pass along to our children
all the freedoms we enjoy, and chief among them is freedom from fear.

In the 31/2 years since September the 11th, 2001, we have taken unprecedented
actions to protect Americans. We've created a new Department of Government to
defend our homeland, focused the FBI on preventing terrorism, begun to reform
our intelligence agencies, broken up terror cells across the country, expanded
research on defenses against biological and chemical attack, improved border
security, and trained more than a half million first-responders. Police and
firefighters, air marshals, researchers, and so many others are working every
day to make our homeland safer, and we thank them all.

Our Nation, working with allies and friends, has also confronted the enemy
abroad with measures that are determined, successful, and continuing. The Al
Qaida terror network that attacked our country still has leaders, but many of
its top commanders have been removed. There are still governments that sponsor
and harbor terrorists, but their number has declined. There are still regimes
seeking weapons of mass destruction but no longer without attention and without
consequence. Our country is still the target of terrorists who want to kill many
and intimidate us all, and we will stay on the offensive against them until the
fight is won.

Pursuing our enemies is a vital commitment of the war on terror, and I thank the
Congress for providing our service men and women with the resources they have
needed. During this time of war, we must continue to support our military and
give them the tools for victory.

Other nations around the globe have stood with us. In Afghanistan, an
international force is helping provide security. In Iraq, 28 countries have
troops on the ground, the United Nations and the European Union provided
technical assistance for the elections, and NATO is leading a mission to help
train Iraqi officers. We're cooperating with 60 governments in the Proliferation
Security Initiative to detect and stop the transit of dangerous materials. We're
working closely with the governments in Asia to convince North Korea to abandon
its nuclear ambitions. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and nine other countries have
captured or detained Al Qaida terrorists. In the next 4 years, my administration
will continue to build the coalitions that will defeat the dangers of our time.

In the long term, the peace we seek will only be achieved by eliminating the
conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of murder. If whole regions of
the world remain in despair and grow in hatred, they will be the recruiting
grounds for terror, and that terror will stalk America and other free nations
for decades. The only force powerful enough to stop the rise of tyranny and
terror and replace hatred with hope is the force of human freedom. Our enemies
know this, and that is why the terrorist Zarqawi recently declared war on what
he called the "evil principle" of democracy. And we've declared our own
intention: America will stand with the allies of freedom to support democratic
movements in the Middle East and beyond, with the ultimate goal of ending
tyranny in our world.

The United States has no right, no desire, and no intention to impose our form
of government on anyone else. That is one of the main differences between us and
our enemies. They seek to impose and expand an empire of oppression in which a
tiny group of brutal, self-appointed rulers control every aspect of every life.
Our aim is to build and preserve a community of free and independent nations,
with governments that answer to their citizens and reflect their own cultures.
And because democracies respect their own people and their neighbors, the
advance of freedom will lead to peace.

That advance has great momentum in our time, shown by women voting in
Afghanistan and Palestinians choosing a new direction and the people of Ukraine
asserting their democratic rights and electing a President. We are witnessing
landmark events in the history of liberty, and in the coming years, we will add
to that story.

The beginnings of reform and democracy in the Palestinian territories are now
showing the power of freedom to break old patterns of violence and failure.
Tomorrow morning Secretary of State Rice departs on a trip that will take her to
Israel and the West Bank for meetings with Prime Minister Sharon and President
Abbas. She will discuss with them how we and our friends can help the
Palestinian people end terror and build the institutions of a peaceful,
independent, democratic state. To promote this democracy, I will ask Congress
for $350 million to support Palestinian political, economic, and security
reforms. The goal of two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace is within reach, and America will help them achieve that goal.

To promote peace and stability in the broader Middle East, the United States
will work with our friends in the region to fight the common threat of terror,
while we encourage a higher standard of freedom. Hopeful reform is already
taking hold in an arc from Morocco to Jordan to Bahrain. The Government of Saudi
Arabia can demonstrate its leadership in the region by expanding the role of its
people in determining their future. And the great and proud nation of Egypt,
which showed the way toward peace in the Middle East, can now show the way
toward democracy in the Middle East.

To promote peace in the broader Middle East, we must confront regimes that
continue to harbor terrorists and pursue weapons of mass murder. Syria still
allows its territory and parts of Lebanon to be used by terrorists who seek to
destroy every chance of peace in the region. You have passed and we are applying
the Syrian Accountability Act, and we expect the Syrian Government to end all
support for terror and open the door to freedom. Today, Iran remains the world's
primary state sponsor of terror, pursuing nuclear weapons while depriving its
people of the freedom they seek and deserve. We are working with European allies
to make clear to the Iranian regime that it must give up its uranium enrichment
program and any plutonium reprocessing and end its support for terror. And to
the Iranian people, I say tonight: As you stand for your own liberty, America
stands with you.

Our generational commitment to the advance of freedom, especially in the Middle
East, is now being tested and honored in Iraq. That country is a vital front in
the war on terror, which is why the terrorists have chosen to make a stand
there. Our men and women in uniform are fighting terrorists in Iraq so we do not
have to face them here at home. And the victory of freedom in Iraq will
strengthen a new ally in the war on terror, inspire democratic reformers from
Damascus to Tehran, bring more hope and progress to a troubled region, and
thereby lift a terrible threat from the lives of our children and grandchildren.

We will succeed because the Iraqi people value their own liberty, as they showed
the world last Sunday. Across Iraq, often at great risk, millions of citizens
went to the polls and elected 275 men and women to represent them in a new
Transitional National Assembly. A young woman in Baghdad told of waking to the
sound of mortar fire on election day and wondering if it might be too dangerous
to vote. She said, "Hearing those explosions, it occurred to me: The insurgents
are weak; they are afraid of democracy; they are losing. So I got my husband and
I got my parents, and we all came out and voted together." Americans recognize
that spirit of liberty, because we share it. In any nation, casting your vote is
an act of civic responsibility. For millions of Iraqis, it was also an act of
personal courage, and they have earned the respect of us all.

One of Iraq's leading democracy and human rights advocates is Safia Taleb
al-Suhail. She says of her country, "We were occupied for 35 years by Saddam
Hussein. That was the real occupation. Thank you to the American people who paid
the cost but, most of all, to the soldiers." Eleven years ago, Safia's father
was assassinated by Saddam's intelligence service. Three days ago in Baghdad,
Safia was finally able to vote for the leaders of her country, and we are
honored that she is with us tonight.

The terrorists and insurgents are violently opposed to democracy and will
continue to attack it. Yet, the terrorists' most powerful myth is being
destroyed. The whole world is seeing that the car bombers and assassins are not
only fighting coalition forces; they are trying to destroy the hopes of Iraqis,
expressed in free elections. And the whole world now knows that a small group of
extremists will not overturn the will of the Iraqi people.

We will succeed in Iraq because Iraqis are determined to fight for their own
freedom and to write their own history. As Prime Minister Allawi said in his
speech to Congress last September, "Ordinary Iraqis are anxious to shoulder all
the security burdens of our country as quickly as possible." That is the
natural desire of an independent nation, and it is also the stated mission of
our coalition in Iraq. The new political situation in Iraq opens a new phase of
our work in that country.

At the recommendation of our commanders on the ground and in consultation with
the Iraqi Government, we will increasingly focus our efforts on helping prepare
more capable Iraqi security forces, forces with skilled officers and an
effective command structure. As those forces become more self-reliant and take
on greater security responsibilities, America and its coalition partners will
increasingly be in a supporting role. In the end, Iraqis must be able to defend
their own country, and we will help that proud new nation secure its liberty.

Recently an Iraqi interpreter said to a reporter, "Tell America not to abandon
us." He and all Iraqis can be certain: While our military strategy is adapting
to circumstances, our commitment remains firm and unchanging. We are standing
for the freedom of our Iraqi friends, and freedom in Iraq will make America
safer for generations to come. We will not set an artificial timetable for
leaving Iraq, because that would embolden the terrorists and make them believe
they can wait us out. We are in Iraq to achieve a result, a country that is
democratic, representative of all its people, at peace with its neighbors, and
able to defend itself. And when that result is achieved, our men and women
serving in Iraq will return home with the honor they have earned.

Right now, Americans in uniform are serving at posts across the world, often
taking great risks on my orders. We have given them training and equipment, and
they have given us an example of idealism and character that makes every
American proud. The volunteers of our military are unrelenting in battle,
unwavering in loyalty, unmatched in honor and decency, and every day they're
making our Nation more secure. Some of our service men and women have survived
terrible injuries, and this grateful country will do everything we can to help
them recover. And we have said farewell to some very good men and women who died
for our freedom and whose memory this Nation will honor forever.

One name we honor is Marine Corps Sergeant Byron Norwood of Pflugerville, Texas,
who was killed during the assault on Fallujah. His mom, Janet, sent me a letter
and told me how much Byron loved being a marine and how proud he was to be on
the frontline against terror. She wrote, "When Byron was home the last time, I
said that I wanted to protect him like I had since he was born. He just hugged
me and said, 'You've done your job, Mom. Now it is my turn to protect you.' "
Ladies and gentlemen, with grateful hearts we honor freedom's defenders and our
military families, represented here this evening by Sergeant Norwood's mom and
dad, Janet and Bill Norwood.

(At this point, in the First Lady's box, guest Safia Taleb al-Suhail embraced
guest Janet Norwood.)

In these 4 years, Americans have seen the unfolding of large events. We have
known times of sorrow and hours of uncertainty and days of victory. In all this
history, even when we have disagreed, we have seen threads of purpose that unite
us. The attack on freedom in our world has reaffirmed our confidence in
freedom's power to change the world. We are all part of a great venture: To
extend the promise of freedom in our country, to renew the values that sustain
our liberty, and to spread the peace that freedom brings.

As Franklin Roosevelt once reminded Americans, "Each age is a dream that is
dying, or one that is coming to birth." And we live in the country where the
biggest dreams are born. The abolition of slavery was only a dream until it was
fulfilled. The liberation of Europe from fascism was only a dream until it was
achieved. The fall of imperial communism was only a dream until, one day, it was
accomplished. Our generation has dreams of its own, and we also go forward with
confidence. The road of providence is uneven and unpredictable, yet we know
where it leads: It leads to freedom.

Thank you, and may God bless America.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, members of the Supreme
Court and Diplomatic Corps, distinguished guests and fellow citizens:

Today our Nation lost a beloved, graceful, courageous woman who called America
to its founding ideals and carried on a noble dream. Tonight we are comforted by
the hope of a glad reunion with the husband who was taken from her so long ago,
and we are grateful for the good life of Coretta Scott King.

Every time I am invited to this rostrum, I am humbled by the privilege, and
mindful of the history we have seen together. We have gathered under this
Capitol dome in moments of national mourning and national achievement. We have
served America through one of the most consequential periods of our history, and
it has been my honor to serve with you.

In a system of two parties, two chambers, and two elected branches, there will
always be differences and debate. But even tough debates can be conducted in a
civil tone, and our differences cannot be allowed to harden into anger. To
confront the great issues before us, we must act in a spirit of good will and
respect for one another, and I will do my part. Tonight the state of our Union
is strong, and together we will make it stronger.

In this decisive year, you and I will make choices that determine both the
future and the character of our country. We will choose to act confidently in
pursuing the enemies of freedom, or retreat from our duties in the hope of an
easier life. We will choose to build our prosperity by leading the world
economy, or shut ourselves off from trade and opportunity. In a complex and
challenging time, the road of isolationism and protectionism may seem broad and
inviting, yet it ends in danger and decline. The only way to protect our people,
the only way to secure the peace, the only way to control our destiny is by our
leadership, so the United States of America will continue to lead.

Abroad, our Nation is committed to a historic, long-term goal. We seek the end
of tyranny in our world. Some dismiss that goal as misguided idealism. In
reality, the future security of America depends on it. On September 11, 2001, we
found that problems originating in a failed and oppressive state 7,000 miles
away could bring murder and destruction to our country. Dictatorships shelter
terrorists, feed resentment and radicalism, and seek weapons of mass
destruction. Democracies replace resentment with hope, respect the rights of
their citizens and their neighbors, and join the fight against terror. Every
step toward freedom in the world makes our country safer, and so we will act
boldly in freedom's cause.

Far from being a hopeless dream, the advance of freedom is the great story of
our time. In 1945, there were about two dozen lonely democracies in the world.
Today, there are 122. And we are writing a new chapter in the story of
self-government, with women lining up to vote in Afghanistan, and millions of
Iraqis marking their liberty with purple ink, and men and women from Lebanon to
Egypt debating the rights of individuals and the necessity of freedom. At the
start of 2006, more than half the people of our world live in democratic
nations. And we do not forget the other half, in places like Syria, Burma,
Zimbabwe, North Korea, and Iran, because the demands of justice, and the peace
of this world, require their freedom as well.

No one can deny the success of freedom, but some men rage and fight against it.
And one of the main sources of reaction and opposition is radical Islam, the
perversion by a few of a noble faith into an ideology of terror and death.
Terrorists like bin Laden are serious about mass murder, and all of us must take
their declared intentions seriously. They seek to impose a heartless system of
totalitarian control throughout the Middle East and arm themselves with weapons
of mass murder. Their aim is to seize power in Iraq and use it as a safe haven
to launch attacks against America and the world. Lacking the military strength
to challenge us directly, the terrorists have chosen the weapon of fear. When
they murder children at a school in Beslan, or blow up commuters in London, or
behead a bound captive, the terrorists hope these horrors will break our will,
allowing the violent to inherit the Earth. But they have miscalculated: we love
our freedom, and we will fight to keep it.

In a time of testing, we cannot find security by abandoning our commitments and
retreating within our borders. If we were to leave these vicious attackers
alone, they would not leave us alone. They would simply move the battlefield to
our own shores. There is no peace in retreat. And there is no honor in retreat.
By allowing radical Islam to work its will, by leaving an assaulted world to
fend for itself, we would signal to all that we no longer believe in our own
ideals, or even in our own courage. But our enemies and our friends can be
certain: the United States will not retreat from the world, and we will never
surrender to evil.

America rejects the false comfort of isolationism. We are the Nation that saved
liberty in Europe, and liberated death camps, and helped raise up democracies,
and faced down an evil empire. Once again, we accept the call of history to
deliver the oppressed, and move this world toward peace.

We remain on the offensive against terror networks. We have killed or captured
many of their leaders. And for the others, their day will come. We remain on the
offensive in Afghanistan, where a fine president and national assembly are
fighting terror while building the institutions of a new democracy.

And we are on the offensive in Iraq, with a clear plan for victory. First, we
are helping Iraqis build an inclusive government, so that old resentments will
be eased and the insurgency will be marginalized. Second, we are continuing
reconstruction efforts and helping the Iraqi government to fight corruption and
build a modern economy, so all Iraqis can experience the benefits of freedom.
Third, we are striking terrorist targets while we train Iraqi forces that are
increasingly capable of defeating the enemy. Iraqis are showing their courage
every day, and we are proud to be their allies in the cause of freedom.

Our work in Iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal. But that brutality
has not stopped the dramatic progress of a new democracy. In less than 3 years,
that nation has gone from dictatorship, to liberation, to sovereignty, to a
constitution, to national elections. At the same time, our coalition has been
relentless in shutting off terrorist infiltration, clearing out insurgent
strongholds, and turning over territory to Iraqi security forces. I am confident
in our plan for victory. I am confident in the will of the Iraqi people. I am
confident in the skill and spirit of our military. Fellow citizens, we are in
this fight to win, and we are winning.

The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home. As we make
progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly take the lead, we should
be able to further decrease our troop levels; but those decisions will be made
by our military commanders, not by politicians in Washington, D.C.

Our coalition has learned from our experience in Iraq. We have adjusted our
military tactics and changed our approach to reconstruction. Along the way, we
have benefited from responsible criticism and counsel offered by Members of
Congress of both parties. In the coming year, I will continue to reach out and
seek your good advice.

Yet there is a difference between responsible criticism that aims for success
and defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure. Hindsight alone
is not wisdom. And second-guessing is not a strategy.

With so much in the balance, those of us in public office have a duty to speak
with candor. A sudden withdrawal of our forces from Iraq would abandon our Iraqi
allies to death and prison, put men like bin Laden and Zarqawi in charge of a
strategic country, and show that a pledge from America means little. Members of
Congress: however we feel about the decisions and debates of the past, our
Nation has only one option: we must keep our word, defeat our enemies, and stand
behind the American military in its vital mission.

Our men and women in uniform are making sacrifices and showing a sense of duty
stronger than all fear. They know what it is like to fight house to house in a
maze of streets, to wear heavy gear in the desert heat, to see a comrade killed
by a roadside bomb. And those who know the costs also know the stakes. Marine
Staff Sergeant Dan Clay was killed last month fighting in Fallujah. He left
behind a letter to his family, but his words could just as well be addressed to
every American. Here is what Dan wrote: "I know what honor is. It has been an
honor to protect and serve all of you. I faced death with the secure knowledge
that you would not have to. Never falter. Don't hesitate to honor and support
those of us who have the honor of protecting that which is worth protecting."

Staff Sergeant Dan Clay's wife, Lisa, and his mom and dad, Sara Jo and Bud, are
with us this evening. Welcome. Our Nation is grateful to the fallen, who live in
the memory of our country. We are grateful to all who volunteer to wear our
Nation's uniform; and as we honor our brave troops, let us never forget the
sacrifices of America's military families.

Our offensive against terror involves more than military action. Ultimately, the
only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their dark vision of hatred and
fear by offering the hopeful alternative of political freedom and peaceful
change. So the United States of America supports democratic reform across the
broader Middle East. Elections are vital, but they are only the beginning.
Raising up a democracy requires the rule of law, protection of minorities, and
strong, accountable institutions that last longer than a single vote. The great
people of Egypt have voted in a multiparty presidential election, and now their
government should open paths of peaceful opposition that will reduce the appeal
of radicalism. The Palestinian people have voted in elections, and now the
leaders of Hamas must recognize Israel, disarm, reject terrorism, and work for
lasting peace. Saudi Arabia has taken the first steps of reform. Now it can
offer its people a better future by pressing forward with those efforts.

Democracies in the Middle East will not look like our own, because they will
reflect the traditions of their own citizens. Yet liberty is the future of every
nation in the Middle East, because liberty is the right and hope of all
humanity.

The same is true of Iran, a nation now held hostage by a small clerical elite
that is isolating and repressing its people. The regime in that country sponsors
terrorists in the Palestinian territories and in Lebanon, and that must come to
an end. The Iranian government is defying the world with its nuclear ambitions,
and the nations of the world must not permit the Iranian regime to gain nuclear
weapons. America will continue to rally the world to confront these threats. And
tonight, let me speak directly to the citizens of Iran: America respects you,
and we respect your country. We respect your right to choose your own future and
win your own freedom. And our Nation hopes one day to be the closest of friends
with a free and democratic Iran.

To overcome dangers in our world, we must also take the offensive by encouraging
economic progress, fighting disease, and spreading hope in hopeless lands.
Isolationism would not only tie our hands in fighting enemies; it would keep us
from helping our friends in desperate need. We show compassion abroad because
Americans believe in the God-given dignity and worth of a villager with
HIV/AIDS, or an infant with malaria, or a refugee fleeing genocide, or a young
girl sold into slavery. We also show compassion abroad because regions
overwhelmed by poverty, corruption, and despair are sources of terrorism,
organized crime, human trafficking, and the drug trade.

In recent years, you and I have taken unprecedented action to fight AIDS and
malaria, expand the education of girls, and reward developing nations that are
moving forward with economic and political reform. For people everywhere, the
United States is a partner for a better life. Shortchanging these efforts would
increase the suffering and chaos of our world, undercut our long-term security,
and dull the conscience of our country. I urge Members of Congress to serve the
interests of America by showing the compassion of America.

Our country must also remain on the offensive against terrorism here at home.
The enemy has not lost the desire or capability to attack us. Fortunately, this
Nation has superb professionals in law enforcement, intelligence, the military,
and homeland security. These men and women are dedicating their lives to
protecting us all, and they deserve our support and our thanks. They also
deserve the same tools they already use to fight drug trafficking and organized
crime, so I ask you to reauthorize the PATRIOT Act.

It is said that prior to the attacks of September 11, our government failed to
connect the dots of the conspiracy. We now know that two of the hijackers in the
United States placed telephone calls to al Qaeda operatives overseas. But we did
not know about their plans until it was too late. So to prevent another attack,
based on authority given to me by the Constitution and by statute, I have
authorized a terrorist surveillance program to aggressively pursue the
international communications of suspected al Qaeda operatives and affiliates to
and from America. Previous Presidents have used the same constitutional
authority I have, and Federal courts have approved the use of that authority.
Appropriate Members of Congress have been kept informed. This terrorist
surveillance program has helped prevent terrorist attacks. It remains essential
to the security of America. If there are people inside our country who are
talking with al Qaeda, we want to know about it, because we will not sit back
and wait to be hit again.

In all these areas, from the disruption of terror networks, to victory in Iraq,
to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled regions, we need the support of
our friends and allies. To draw that support, we must always be clear in our
principles and willing to act. The only alternative to American leadership is a
dramatically more dangerous and anxious world. Yet we also choose to lead
because it is a privilege to serve the values that gave us birth. American
leaders, from Roosevelt to Truman to Kennedy to Reagan, rejected isolation and
retreat because they knew that America is always more secure when freedom is on
the march. Our own generation is in a long war against a determined enemy, a war
that will be fought by Presidents of both parties, who will need steady
bipartisan support from the Congress. And tonight I ask for yours. Together, let
us protect our country, support the men and women who defend us, and lead this
world toward freedom.

Here at home, America also has a great opportunity: we will build the prosperity
of our country by strengthening our economic leadership in the world.

Our economy is healthy and vigorous and growing faster than other major
industrialized nations. In the last 21/2 years, America has created 4.6
million new jobs, more than Japan and the European Union combined. Even in the
face of higher energy prices and natural disasters, the American people have
turned in an economic performance that is the envy of the world.

The American economy is preeminent, but we cannot afford to be complacent. In a
dynamic world economy, we are seeing new competitors like China and India. This
creates uncertainty, which makes it easier to feed people's fears. And so we are
seeing some old temptations return. Protectionists want to escape competition,
pretending that we can keep our high standard of living while walling off our
economy. Others say that the government needs to take a larger role in directing
the economy, centralizing more power in Washington and increasing taxes. We hear
claims that immigrants are somehow bad for the economy, even though this economy
could not function without them. All these are forms of economic retreat, and
they lead in the same direction, toward a stagnant and second-rate economy.

Tonight I will set out a better path, an agenda for a Nation that competes with
confidence, an agenda that will raise standards of living and generate new jobs.
Americans should not fear our economic future, because we intend to shape it.

Keeping America competitive begins with keeping our economy growing, and our
economy grows when Americans have more of their own money to spend, save, and
invest. In the last 5 years, the tax relief you passed has left $880 billion in
the hands of American workers, investors, small businesses, and families; and
they have used it to help produce more than 4 years of uninterrupted economic
growth. Yet the tax relief is set to expire in the next few years. If we do
nothing, American families will face a massive tax increase they do not expect
and will not welcome.

Because America needs more than a temporary expansion, we need more than
temporary tax relief. I urge the Congress to act responsibly and make the tax
cuts permanent.

Keeping America competitive requires us to be good stewards of tax dollars.
Every year of my Presidency, we have reduced the growth of nonsecurity
discretionary spending, and last year you passed bills that cut this spending.
This year my budget will cut it again and reduce or eliminate more than 140
programs that are performing poorly or not fulfilling essential priorities. By
passing these reforms, we will save the American taxpayer another $14 billion
next year and stay on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009. I am pleased
that Members of Congress are working on earmark reform, because the Federal
budget has too many special interest projects. And we can tackle this problem
together, if you pass the line-item veto.

We must also confront the larger challenge of mandatory spending, or
entitlements. This year, the first of about 78 million baby boomers turn 60,
including two of my dad's favorite people, me and President Clinton. This
milestone is more than a personal crisis; it is a national challenge. The
retirement of the baby boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the
Federal Government. By 2030, spending for Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid alone will be almost 60 percent of the entire Federal budget. And that
will present future Congresses with impossible choices, staggering tax
increases, immense deficits, or deep cuts in every category of spending.

Congress did not act last year on my proposal to save Social Security; yet the
rising cost of entitlements is a problem that is not going away. And with every
year we fail to act, the situation gets worse. So tonight, I ask you to join me
in creating a commission to examine the full impact of baby boom retirements on
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. This commission should include Members
of Congress of both parties, and offer bipartisan solutions. We need to put
aside partisan politics, work together, and get this problem solved.

Keeping America competitive requires us to open more markets for all that
Americans make and grow. One out of every five factory jobs in America is
related to global trade, and we want people everywhere to buy American. With
open markets and a level playing field, no one can outproduce or outcompete the
American worker.

Keeping America competitive requires an immigration system that upholds our
laws, reflects our values, and serves the interests of our economy. Our Nation
needs orderly and secure borders. To meet this goal, we must have stronger
immigration enforcement and border protection. And we must have a rational,
humane guest worker program that rejects amnesty, allows temporary jobs for
people who seek them legally, and reduces smuggling and crime at the border.

Keeping America competitive requires affordable health care. Our government has
a responsibility to help provide health care for the poor and the elderly, and
we are meeting that responsibility. For all Americans, we must confront the
rising cost of care, strengthen the doctor-patient relationship, and help people
afford the insurance coverage they need. We will make wider use of electronic
records and other health information technology to help control costs and reduce
dangerous medical errors. We will strengthen health savings accounts by making
sure individuals and small business employees can buy insurance with the same
advantages that people working for big businesses now get. We will do more to
make this coverage portable, so workers can switch jobs without having to worry
about losing their health insurance. And because lawsuits are driving many good
doctors out of practice, leaving women in nearly 1,500 American counties without
a single OB-GYN, I ask the Congress to pass medical liability reform this year.

Keeping America competitive requires affordable energy. Here we have a serious
problem: America is addicted to oil, which is often imported from unstable parts
of the world.

The best way to break this addiction is through technology. Since 2001, we have
spent nearly $10 billion to develop cleaner, cheaper, and more reliable
alternative energy sources; and we are on the threshold of incredible advances.
So tonight, I announce the Advanced Energy Initiative, a 22 percent increase in
clean energy research at the Department of Energy, to push for breakthroughs in
two vital areas. To change how we power our homes and offices, we will invest
more in zero- emission coal-fired plants; revolutionary solar and wind
technologies; and clean, safe nuclear energy.

We must also change how we power our automobiles. We will increase our research
in better batteries for hybrid and electric cars and in pollution-free cars that
run on hydrogen. We will also fund additional research in cutting-edge methods
of producing ethanol, not just from corn but from wood chips, stalks, or switch
grass. Our goal is to make this new kind of ethanol practical and competitive
within 6 years. Breakthroughs on this and other new technologies will help us
reach another great goal: to replace more than 75 percent of our oil imports
from the Middle East by 2025. By applying the talent and technology of America,
this country can dramatically improve our environment, move beyond a
petroleum-based economy, and make our dependence on Middle Eastern oil a thing
of the past.

And to keep America competitive, one commitment is necessary above all: we must
continue to lead the world in human talent and creativity. Our greatest
advantage in the world has always been our educated, hardworking, ambitious
people; and we are going to keep that edge. Tonight I announce the American
Competitiveness Initiative, to encourage innovation throughout our economy and
to give our Nation's children a firm grounding in math and science.

First: I propose to double the Federal commitment to the most critical basic
research programs in the physical sciences over the next 10 years. This funding
will support the work of America's most creative minds as they explore promising
areas such as nanotechnology, supercomputing, and alternative energy sources.

Second: I propose to make permanent the research and development tax credit, to
encourage bolder private-sector investment in technology. With more research in
both the public and private sectors, we will improve our quality of life and
ensure that America will lead the world in opportunity and innovation for
decades to come.

Third: We need to encourage children to take more math and science and make sure
those courses are rigorous enough to compete with other nations. We have made a
good start in the early grades with the No Child Left Behind Act, which is
raising standards and lifting test scores across our country. Tonight, I propose
to train 70,000 high school teachers to lead advanced placement courses in math
and science; bring 30,000 math and science professionals to teach in classrooms;
and give early help to students who struggle with math, so they have a better
chance at good high-wage jobs. If we ensure that America's children succeed in
life, they will ensure that America succeeds in the world.

Preparing our Nation to compete in the world is a goal that all of us can share.
I urge you to support the American Competitiveness Initiative, and together we
will show the world what the American people can achieve.

America is a great force for freedom and prosperity. Yet our greatness is not
measured in power or luxuries, but by who we are and how we treat one another.
So we strive to be a compassionate, decent, hopeful society.

In recent years, America has become a more hopeful Nation. Violent crime rates
have fallen to their lowest levels since the 1970s. Welfare cases have dropped
by more than half over the past decade. Drug use among youth is down 19 percent
since 2001. There are fewer abortions in America than at any point in the last
three decades, and the number of children born to teenage mothers has been
falling for a dozen years in a row.

These gains are evidence of a quiet transformation, a revolution of conscience,
in which a rising generation is finding that a life of personal responsibility
is a life of fulfillment. Government has played a role. Wise policies such as
welfare reform, drug education, and support for abstinence and adoption have
made a difference in the character of our country. And everyone here tonight,
Democrat and Republican, has a right to be proud of this record.

Yet many Americans, especially parents, still have deep concerns about the
direction of our culture and the health of our most basic institutions. They are
concerned about unethical conduct by public officials, and discouraged by
activist courts that try to redefine marriage. And they worry about children in
our society who need direction and love, and about fellow citizens still
displaced by natural disaster, and about suffering caused by treatable diseases.

As we look at these challenges, we must never give in to the belief that America
is in decline or that our culture is doomed to unravel. The American people know
better than that. We have proven the pessimists wrong before, and we will do it
again.

A hopeful society depends on courts that deliver equal justice under the law.
The Supreme Court now has two superb new members on its bench, Chief Justice
John Roberts and Justice Sam Alito. I thank the Senate for confirming both of
them. I will continue to nominate men and women who understand that judges must
be servants of the law, and not legislate from the bench. Today marks the
official retirement of a very special American. For 24 years of faithful service
to our Nation, the United States is grateful to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.

A hopeful society has institutions of science and medicine that do not cut
ethical corners and that recognize the matchless value of every life. Tonight, I
ask you to pass legislation to prohibit the most egregious abuses of medical
research: human cloning in all its forms, creating or implanting embryos for
experiments, creating human-animal hybrids, and buying, selling or patenting
human embryos. Human life is a gift from our Creator, and that gift should never
be discarded, devalued, or put up for sale.

A hopeful society expects elected officials to uphold the public trust.
Honorable people in both parties are working on reforms to strengthen the
ethical standards of Washington, and I support your efforts. Each of us has made
a pledge to be worthy of public responsibility, and that is a pledge we must
never forget, never dismiss, and never betray.

As we renew the promise of our institutions, let us also show the character of
America in our compassion and care for one another.

A hopeful society gives special attention to children who lack direction and
love. Through the Helping America's Youth Initiative, we are encouraging caring
adults to get involved in the life of a child, and this good work is being led
by our First Lady, Laura Bush. This year we will add resources to encourage
young people to stay in school, so more of America's youth can raise their
sights and achieve their dreams.

A hopeful society comes to the aid of fellow citizens in times of suffering and
emergency and stays at it until they are back on their feet. So far the Federal
Government has committed $85 billion to the people of the gulf coast and New
Orleans. We are removing debris, repairing highways, and building stronger
levees. We are providing business loans and housing assistance. Yet as we meet
these immediate needs, we must also address deeper challenges that existed
before the storm arrived. In New Orleans and in other places, many of our fellow
citizens have felt excluded from the promise of our country. The answer is not
only temporary relief, but schools that teach every child and job skills that
bring upward mobility and more opportunities to own a home and start a business.
As we recover from a disaster, let us also work for the day when all Americans
are protected by justice, equal in hope, and rich in opportunity.

A hopeful society acts boldly to fight diseases like HIV/AIDS, which can be
prevented and treated and defeated. More than a million Americans live with HIV,
and half of all AIDS cases occur among African Americans. I ask Congress to
reform and reauthorize the Ryan White Act and provide new funding to States so
we end the waiting lists for AIDS medicines in America. We will also lead a
nationwide effort, working closely with African American churches and
faith-based groups, to deliver rapid HIV tests to millions, end the stigma of
AIDS, and come closer to the day when there are no new infections in America.

Fellow citizens, we have been called to leadership in a period of consequence.
We have entered a great ideological conflict we did nothing to invite. We see
great changes in science and commerce that will influence all our lives. And
sometimes it can seem that history is turning in a wide arc, toward an unknown
shore.

Yet the destination of history is determined by human action, and every great
movement of history comes to a point of choosing. Lincoln could have accepted
peace at the cost of disunity and continued slavery. Martin Luther King could
have stopped at Birmingham or at Selma and achieved only half a victory over
segregation. The United States could have accepted the permanent division of
Europe and been complicit in the oppression of others. Today, having come far in
our own historical journey, we must decide: Will we turn back, or finish well?

Before history is written down in books, it is written in courage. Like
Americans before us, we will show that courage, and we will finish well. We will
lead freedom's advance. We will compete and excel in the global economy. We will
renew the defining moral commitments of this land. And so we move forward,
optimistic about our country, faithful to its cause, and confident of the
victories to come.

May God bless America.

(Applause, the Members rising.)
TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

Thank you very much. Tonight, I have a high privilege and
distinct honor of my own -- as the first President to begin the State of the Union
message with these words: Madam Speaker.

In his day, the late Congressman Thomas D'Alesandro, Jr., from Baltimore,
Maryland, saw Presidents Roosevelt and Truman at this rostrum. But nothing could
compare with the sight of his only daughter, Nancy, presiding tonight as Speaker
of the House of Representatives. Congratulations, Madam Speaker.

Two Members of the House and Senate are not with us tonight, and we pray for the
recovery and speedy return of Senator Tim Johnson and Congressman Charlie
Norwood.

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests,
and fellow citizens:

This rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour, when decisions are
hard and courage is tested. We enter the year 2007 with large endeavors under
way, and others that are ours to begin. In all of this, much is asked of us. We
must have the will to face difficult challenges and determined enemies, and the
wisdom to face them together.

Some in this Chamber are new to the House and Senate, and I congratulate the
Democratic majority. Congress has changed, but our responsibilities have not.
Each of us is guided by our own convictions, and to these we must stay faithful.
Yet we are all held to the same standards and called to serve the same good
purposes: to extend the Nation's prosperity, to spend the people's money wisely,
to solve problems, not leave them to future generations, to guard America
against all evil, and to keep faith with those we have sent forth to defend us.

We are not the first to come here with government divided and uncertainty in the
air. Like many before us, we can work through our differences and achieve big
things for the American people. Our citizens don't much care which side of the
aisle we sit on, as long as we are willing to cross that aisle when there is
work to be done. Our job is to make life better for our fellow Americans and
help them to build a future of hope and opportunity, and this is the business
before us tonight.

A future of hope and opportunity begins with a growing economy, and that is what
we have. We are now in the 41st month of uninterrupted job growth, in a recovery
that has created 7.2 million new jobs, so far. Unemployment is low, inflation is
low, and wages are rising. The economy is on the move, and our job is to keep it
that way, not with more government but with more enterprise.

Next week, I will deliver a full report on the state of our economy. Tonight, I
want to discuss three economic reforms that deserve to be priorities for this
Congress.

First, we must balance the Federal budget. We can do so without raising taxes.
What we need to do is impose spending discipline in Washington, D.C. We set a
goal of cutting the deficit in half by 2009, and met that goal 3 years ahead of
schedule. Now let us take the next step. In the coming weeks, I will submit a
budget that eliminates the Federal deficit within the next 5 years. I ask you to
make the same commitment. Together, we can restrain the spending appetite of the
Federal Government and balance the Federal budget.

Next, there is the matter of earmarks. These special interest items are often
slipped into bills at the last hour, when not even C-SPAN is watching. In 2005
alone, the number of earmarks grew to over 13,000 and totaled nearly $18
billion. Even worse, over 90 percent of earmarks never make it to the floor of
the House and Senate. They are dropped into committee reports that are not even
part of the bill that arrives on my desk. You did not vote them into law. I did
not sign them into law. Yet they are treated as if they have the force of law.
The time has come to end this practice. So let us work together to reform the
budget process, expose every earmark to the light of day and to a vote in
Congress, and cut the number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of
this session.

Finally, to keep this economy strong we must take on the challenge of
entitlements. Social Security and Medicare and Medicaid are commitments of
conscience, and so it is our duty to keep them permanently sound. Yet we are
failing in that duty, and this failure will one day leave our children with
three bad options: huge tax increases, huge deficits, or huge and immediate cuts
in benefits. Everyone in this Chamber knows this to be true, yet somehow we have
not found it in ourselves to act. So let us work together and do it now. With
enough good sense and good will, you and I can fix Medicare and Medicaid, and
save Social Security.

Spreading opportunity and hope in America also requires public schools that give
children the knowledge and character they need in life. Five years ago, we rose
above partisan differences to pass the No Child Left Behind Act, preserving
local control, raising standards, and holding those schools accountable for
results. And because we acted, students are performing better in reading and
math, and minority students are closing the achievement gap.

Now the task is to build on this success, without watering down standards,
without taking control from local communities, and without back sliding and
calling it reform. We can lift student achievement even higher by giving local
leaders flexibility to turn around failing schools, and by giving families with
children stuck in failing schools the right to choose someplace better. We must
increase funds for students who struggle, and make sure these children get the
special help they need. And we can make sure our children are prepared for the
jobs of the future, and our country is more competitive, by strengthening math
and science skills. The No Child Left Behind Act has worked for America's
children, and I ask Congress to reauthorize this good law.

A future of hope and opportunity requires that all our citizens have affordable
and available health care. When it comes to health care, government has an
obligation to care for the elderly, the disabled, and poor children, and we will
meet those responsibilities. For all other Americans, private health care
insurance is the best way to meet their needs. But many Americans cannot afford
a health insurance policy.

So tonight, I propose two new initiatives to help more Americans afford their
own insurance. First, I propose a standard tax deduction for health insurance
that will be like the standard tax deduction for dependents. Families with
health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $15,000 of their income.
Single Americans with health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on
$7,500 of their income. With this reform, more than 100 million men, women, and
children who are now covered by employer-provided insurance will benefit from
lower tax bills.

At the same time, this reform will level the playing field for those who do not
get health insurance through their job. For Americans who now purchase health
insurance on their own, this proposal would mean a substantial tax savings,
$4,500 for a family of four making $60,000 a year. And for the millions of other
Americans who have no health insurance at all, this deduction would help put a
basic private health insurance plan within their reach. Changing the Tax Code is
a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more Americans.

My second proposal is to help the States that are coming up with innovative ways
to cover the uninsured. States that make basic private health insurance
available to all their citizens should receive Federal funds to help them
provide this coverage to the poor and the sick. I have asked the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to work with Congress to take existing Federal funds
and use them to create "Affordable Choices" grants. These grants would give our
Nation's Governors more money and more flexibility to get private health
insurance to those most in need.

There are many other ways that Congress can help. We need to expand health
savings accounts. We need to help small businesses through association health
plans, we need to reduce costs and medical errors with better information
technology. We will encourage price transparency, and to protect good doctors
from junk lawsuits we need to pass medical liability reform. And in all we do,
we must remember that the best health care decisions are made not by government
and insurance companies, but by patients and their doctors.

Extending hope and opportunity in our country requires an immigration system
worthy of America, with laws that are fair and borders that are secure. When
laws and borders are routinely violated, this harms the interests of our
country. To secure our border, we are doubling the size of the Border Patrol,
and funding new infrastructure and technology.

Yet even with all these steps, we cannot fully secure the border unless we take
pressure off the border, and that requires a temporary worker program. We should
establish a legal and orderly path for foreign workers to enter our country to
work on a temporary basis. As a result, they won't have to try to sneak in, and
that will leave border agents free to chase down drug smugglers and criminals
and terrorists. We will enforce our immigration laws at the work site, and give
employers the tools to verify the legal status of their workers, so there is no
excuse left for violating the law. We need to uphold the great tradition of the
melting pot that welcomes and assimilates new arrivals. We need to resolve the
status of illegal immigrants who are already in our country, without animosity
and without amnesty.

Convictions run deep in this Capitol when it comes to immigration. Let us have a
serious, civil, and conclusive debate, so that you can pass, and I can sign,
comprehensive immigration reform into law.

Extending hope and opportunity depends on a stable supply of energy that keeps
America's economy running and America's environment clean. For too long our
Nation has been dependent on foreign oil, and this dependence leaves us more
vulnerable to hostile regimes, and to terrorists, who could cause huge
disruptions of oil shipments, and raise the price of oil, and do great harm to
our economy.

It is in our vital interest to diversify America's energy supply, and the way
forward is through technology. We must continue changing the way America
generates electric power, by even greater use of clean coal technology, solar
and wind energy, and clean, safe nuclear power. We need to press on with battery
research for plug-in and hybrid vehicles and expand the use of clean diesel
vehicles and biodiesel fuel. We must continue investing in new methods of
producing ethanol, using everything from wood chips, to grasses, to agricultural
wastes.

We have made a lot of progress, thanks to good policies here in Washington and
the strong response of the market. And now even more dramatic advances are
within reach. Tonight, I ask Congress to join me in pursuing a great goal. Let
us build on the work we have done and reduce gasoline usage in the United States
by 20 percent in the next 10 years. When we do that, we will be cutting our
total imports by the equivalent of three-quarters of all the oil we now import
from the Middle East.

To reach this goal, we must increase the supply of alternative fuels, by setting
a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion gallons of renewable and
alternative fuels in 2017. And that is nearly five times the current target. At
the same time, we need to reform and modernize fuel economy standards for cars
the way we did for light trucks, and conserve up to 81/2 billion more gallons
of gasoline by 2017.

Achieving these ambitious goals will dramatically reduce our dependence on
foreign oil, but it is not going to eliminate it. So as we continue to diversify
our fuel supply, we must also step up domestic oil production in environmentally
sensitive ways. And to further protect America against severe disruptions to our
oil supply, I ask Congress to double the current capacity of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve.

America is on the verge of technological breakthroughs that will enable us to
live our lives less dependent on oil. These technologies will help us become
better stewards of the environment, and they will help us to confront the
serious challenge of global climate change.

A future of hope and opportunity requires a fair, impartial system of justice.
The lives of our citizens across our Nation are affected by the outcome of cases
pending in our Federal courts. We have a shared obligation to ensure that the
Federal courts have enough judges to hear those cases and deliver timely
rulings. As president, I have a duty to nominate qualified men and women to
vacancies on the Federal bench. And the United States Senate has a duty as well,
to give those nominees a fair hearing and a prompt up-or-down vote on the Senate
floor.

For all of us in this room, there is no higher responsibility than to protect
the people of this country from danger. Five years have come and gone since we
saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that the terrorists can cause. We have had
time to take stock of our situation. We have added many critical protections to
guard the homeland. We know with certainty that the horrors of that September
morning were just a glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us, unless we stop
them.

With the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the causes of conflict and
the course we have followed. Such debates are essential when a great democracy
faces great questions. Yet one question has surely been settled, that to win the
war on terror we must take the fight to the enemy.

From the start, America and our allies have protected our people by staying on
the offense. The enemy knows that the days of comfortable sanctuary, easy
movement, steady financing, and free-flowing communications are long over. For
the terrorists, life since 9/11 has never been the same.

Our success in this war is often measured by the things that did not happen. We
cannot know the full extent of the attacks that we and our allies have prevents,
but here is some of what we do know: we stopped an al Qaeda plot to fly a
hijacked airplane into the tallest building on the west coast. We broke up a
Southeast Asian terrorist cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the United
States. We uncovered an al Qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks
against America. And just last August, British authorities uncovered a plot to
blow up passenger planes bound for America over the Atlantic Ocean. For each
life saved, we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who devote
their lives to finding the terrorists and stopping them.

Every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless ambitions of
this enemy. The evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the
world. And so long as that is the case, America is still a Nation at war.

In the minds of the terrorists, this war began well before September 11 and will
not end until their radical vision is fulfilled. And these past 5 years have
given us a much clearer view of the nature of this enemy. Al Qaeda and its
followers are Sunni extremists, possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh and
narrow ideology. Take almost any principle of civilization, and their goal is
the opposite. They preach with threats, instruct with bullets and bombs, and
promise paradise for the murder of the innocent.

Our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. They want to overthrow
moderate governments and establish safe havens from which to plan and carry out
new attacks on our country. By killing and terrorizing Americans, they want to
force our country to retreat from the world and abandon the cause of liberty.
They would then be free to impose their will and spread their totalitarian
ideology. Listen to this warning from the late terrorist Zarqawi: "We will
sacrifice our blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and what is coming
is even worse." And Osama bin Laden declared: "Death is better than living on
this Earth with the unbelievers among us."

These men are not given to idle words, and they are just one camp in the
Islamist radical movement. In recent times, it has also become clear that we
face an escalating danger from Shia extremists who are just as hostile to
America and are also determined to dominate the Middle East. Many are known to
take direction from the regime in Iran, which is funding and arming terrorists
like Hezbollah, a group second only to al Qaeda in the American lives it has
taken.

The Shia and Sunni extremists are different faces of the same totalitarian
threat. Whatever slogans they chant, when they slaughter the innocent, they have
the same wicked purposes. They want to kill Americans, kill democracy in the
Middle East, and gain the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale.

In the sixth year since our Nation was attacked, I wish I could report to you
that the dangers had ended. They have not. And so it remains the policy of this
government to use every lawful and proper tool of intelligence, diplomacy, law
enforcement, and military action to do our duty, to find these enemies, and to
protect the American people.

This war is more than a clash of arms. It is a decisive ideological struggle,
and the security of our Nation is in the balance. To prevail, we must remove the
conditions that inspire blind hatred, and drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and
to come and kill us. What every terrorist fears most is human freedom, societies
where men and women make their own choices, answer to their own conscience, and
live by their hopes instead of their resentments. Free people are not drawn to
violent and malignant ideologies, and most will choose a better way when they
are given a chance. So we advance our own security interests by helping
moderates, reformers, and brave voices for democracy. The great question of our
day is whether America will help men and women in the Middle East to build free
societies and share in the rights of all humanity. And I say, for the sake of
our own security, we must.

In the last 2 years, we have seen the desire for liberty in the broader Middle
East, and we have been sobered by the enemy's fierce reaction. In 2005, the
world watched as the citizens of Lebanon raised the banner of the Cedar
Revolution. They drove out the Syrian occupiers, and chose new leaders in free
elections. In 2005, the people of Afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected
a democratic legislature. And in 2005, the Iraqi people held three national
elections, choosing a transitional government, adopting the most progressive,
democratic constitution in the Arab world, and then electing a government under
that constitution. Despite endless threats from the killers in their midst,
nearly 12 million Iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and
solidarity we should never forget.

A thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their tactics, and in
2006 they struck back. In Lebanon, assassins took the life of Pierre Gemayel, a
prominent participant in the Cedar Revolution. Hezbollah terrorists, with
support from Syria and Iran, sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to
undermine Lebanon's legitimately elected government. In Afghanistan, Taliban and
al Qaeda fighters tried to regain power by regrouping and engaging Afghan and
NATO forces. In Iraq, al Qaeda and other Sunni extremists blew up one of the
most sacred places in Shia Islam, the Golden Mosque of Samarra. This atrocity,
directed at a Muslim house of prayer, was designed to provoke retaliation from
Iraqi Shia, and it succeeded. Radical Shia elements, some of whom receive
support from Iran, formed death squads. The result was a tragic escalation of
sectarian rage and reprisal that continues to this day.

This is not the fight we entered in Iraq, but it is the fight we are in. Every
one of us wishes that this war were over and won. Yet it would not be like us to
leave our promises unkept, our friends abandoned, and our own security at risk.
Ladies and gentlemen, on this day, at this hour, it is still within our power to
shape the outcome of this battle. Let us find our resolve and turn events toward
victory.

We are carrying out a new strategy in Iraq, a plan that demands more from Iraq's
elected government and gives our forces in Iraq the reinforcements they need to
complete their mission. Our goal is a democratic Iraq that upholds the rule of
law, respects the rights of its people, provides them security, and is an ally
in the war on terror.

In order to make progress toward this goal, the Iraqi Government must stop the
sectarian violence in its capital. But the Iraqis are not yet ready to do this
on their own. So we are deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional
soldiers and marines to Iraq. The vast majority will go to Baghdad, where they
will help Iraqi forces to clear and secure neighborhoods, and serve as advisers
embedded in Iraqi Army units. With Iraqis in the lead, our forces will help
secure the city by chasing down the terrorists, insurgents, and the roaming
death squads. And in Anbar province, where al Qaeda terrorists have gathered and
local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them, we are sending an
additional 4,000 United States marines, with orders to find the terrorists and
clear them out. We did not drive al Qaeda out of their safe haven in Afghanistan
only to let them set up a new safe haven in a free Iraq.

The people of Iraq want to live in peace, and now is the time for their
government to act. Iraq's leaders know that our commitment is not open ended.
They have promised to deploy more of their own troops to secure Baghdad, and
they must do so. They have pledged that they will confront violent radicals of
any faction or political party. And they need to follow through and lift
needless restrictions on Iraqi and Coalition forces so these troops can achieve
their mission of bringing security to all of the people of Baghdad. Iraq's
leaders have committed themselves to a series of benchmarks to achieve
reconciliation, to share oil revenues among all of Iraq's citizens, to put the
wealth of Iraq into the rebuilding of Iraq, to allow more Iraqis to reenter
their nation's civic life, to hold local elections, and to take responsibility
for security in every Iraqi province. But for all of this to happen, Baghdad
must be secured. And our plan will help the Iraqi Government take back its
capital and make good on its commitments.

My fellow citizens, our military commanders and I have carefully weighed the
options. We discussed every possible approach. In the end, I chose this course
of action because it provides the best chance for success. Many in this Chamber
understand that America must not fail in Iraq, because you understand that the
consequences of failure would be grievous and far reaching.

If American forces step back before Baghdad is secure, the Iraqi Government
would be overrun by extremists on all sides. We could expect an epic battle
between Shia extremists backed by Iran, and Sunni extremists aided by al Qaeda
and supporters of the old regime. A contagion of violence could spill out across
the country, and in time the entire region could be drawn into the conflict.

For America, this is a nightmare scenario. For the enemy, this is the objective.
Chaos is their greatest ally in this struggle. And out of chaos in Iraq would
emerge an emboldened enemy with new safe havens, new recruits, new resources,
and an even greater determination to harm America. To allow this to happen would
be to ignore the lessons of September 11 and invite tragedy. And ladies and
gentlemen, nothing is more important at this moment in our history than for
America to succeed in the Middle East, to succeed in Iraq, and to spare the
American people from this danger.

This is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. I have spoken with
many of you in person. I respect you and the arguments you have made. We went
into this largely united, in our assumptions and in our convictions. And
whatever you voted for, you did not vote for failure. Our country is pursuing a
new strategy in Iraq, and I ask you to give it a chance to work. And I ask you
to support our troops in the field, and those on their way.

The war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that will continue
long after you and I have turned our duties over to others. That is why it is
important to work together so our Nation can see this great effort through. Both
parties and both branches should work in close consultation. And this is why I
propose to establish a special advisory council on the war on terror, made up of
leaders in Congress from both political parties. We will share ideas for how to
position America to meet every challenge that confronts us. And we will show our
enemies abroad that we are united in the goal of victory.

One of the first steps we can take together is to add to the ranks of our
military, so that the American Armed Forces are ready for all the challenges
ahead. Tonight I ask the Congress to authorize an increase in the size of our
active Army and Marine Corps by 92,000 in the next 5 years. A second task we can
take on together is to design and establish a volunteer civilian reserve corps.
Such a corps would function much like our military reserve. It would ease the
burden on the Armed Forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills
to serve on missions abroad when America needs them. And it would give people
across America who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining
struggle of our time.

Americans can have confidence in the outcome of this struggle, because we are
not in this struggle alone. We have a diplomatic strategy that is rallying the
world to join in the fight against extremism. In Iraq, multinational forces are
operating under a mandate from the United Nations, and we are working with
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the gulf states to increase support for Iraq's
government. The United Nations has imposed sanctions on Iran and made it clear
that the world will not allow the regime in Tehran to acquire nuclear weapons.
With the other members of the Quartet, the U.N., the European Union and Russia,
we are pursuing diplomacy to help bring peace to the Holy Land, and pursuing the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian state living side by side with Israel
in peace and security. In Afghanistan, NATO has taken the lead in turning back
the Taliban and al Qaeda offensive, the first time the alliance has deployed
forces outside the North Atlantic area. Together with our partners in China,
Japan, Russia, and South Korea, we are pursuing intensive diplomacy to achieve a
Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons. And we will continue to speak out for
the cause of freedom in places like Cuba, Belarus, and Burma, and continue to
awaken the conscience of the world to save the people of Darfur.

American foreign policy is more than a matter of war and diplomacy. Our work in
the world is also based on a timeless truth: to whom much is given, much is
required. We hear the call to take on the challenges of hunger and poverty and
disease, and that is precisely what America is doing. We must continue to fight
HIV/AIDS, especially on the continent of Africa. Because you funded our
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the number of people receiving life-saving drugs
has grown from 50,000 to more than 800,000 in 3 short years. I ask you to
continue funding our efforts to fight HIV/AIDS, and I ask you to provide $1.2
billion over 5 years so we can combat malaria in 15 African countries. I ask
that you fund the Millennium Challenge Account so that American aid reaches the
people who need it, in nations where democracy is on the rise and corruption is
in retreat. And let us continue to support the expanded trade and debt relief
that are the best hope for lifting lives and eliminating poverty.

When America serves others in this way, we show the strength and generosity of
our country. These deeds reflect the character of our people. The greatest
strength we have is the heroic kindness, courage, and self-sacrifice of the
American people. You see this spirit often if you know where to look, and
tonight we need only look above to the gallery.

Dikembe Mutombo grew up in Africa amid great poverty and disease. He came to
Georgetown University on a scholarship to study medicine, but Coach John
Thompson got a look at Dikembe and had a different idea. Dikembe became a star
in the NBA and a citizen of the United States. But he never forgot the land of
his birth, or the duty to share his blessings with others. He built a brand-new
hospital in his old hometown. A friend has said of this good hearted man:
"Mutombo believes that God has given him this opportunity to do great things."
And we are proud to call this son of the Congo a citizen of the United States of
America.


After her daughter was born, Julie Aigner-Clark searched for ways to share her
love of music and art with her child. So she borrowed some equipment and began
filming children's videos in her basement. The Baby Einstein Company was born,
and in just 5 years her business grew to more than $20 million in sales. In
November 2001, Julie sold Baby Einstein to Walt Disney Company; and with her
help, Baby Einstein has grown into a $200 million business. Julie represents the
great enterprising spirit of America. And she is using her success to help
others, producing child safety videos with John Walsh of the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Julie says of her new project: "I believe it is
the most important thing that I have ever done. I believe that children have the
right to live in a world that is safe." And so tonight we are pleased to welcome
this talented business entrepreneur and generous social entrepreneur, Julie
Aigner-Clark.

Three weeks ago, Wesley Autry was waiting at a Harlem subway station with his
two little girls, when he saw a man fall into the path of a train. With seconds
to act, Wesley jumped onto the tracks, pulled the man into the space between the
rails, and held him as the train passed right above their heads. He insists he
is not a hero. He says: "We got guys and girls overseas dying for us to have our
freedoms. We have got to show each other some love." There is something
wonderful about a country that produces a brave and humble man like Wesley
Autry.

Tommy Rieman was a teenager pumping gas in Independence, Kentucky, when he
enlisted in the United States Army. In December 2003, he was on a reconnaissance
mission in Iraq when his team came under heavy enemy fire. From his Humvee,
Sergeant Rieman returned fire. He used his body as a shield to protect his
gunner. He was shot in the chest and arm, and received shrapnel wounds to his
legs, yet he refused medical attention and stayed in the fight. He helped to
repel a second attack, firing grenades at the enemy's position. For his
exceptional courage, Sergeant Rieman was awarded the Silver Star. And like so
many other Americans who have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the
respect and the gratitude of our whole country.

In such courage and compassion, ladies and gentlemen, we see the spirit and
character of America, and these qualities are not in short supply. This is a
decent and honorable country, and resilient, too. We have been through a lot
together. We have met challenges and faced dangers, and we know that more lie
ahead. Yet we can go forward with confidence, because the state of our Union is
strong, our cause in the world is right, and tonight that cause goes on. God
bless. Thank you for your prayers. Thank you.

(Applause, the Members rising.)
Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow citizens:

Seven years have passed since I first stood before you at this rostrum. In
that time, our country has been tested in ways none of us could have imagined.
We have faced hard decisions about peace and war, rising competition in the
world economy, and the health and welfare of our citizens. These issues call
for vigorous debate, and I think its fair to say weve answered that call. Yet
history will record that amid our differences, we acted with purpose. And
together, we showed the world the power and resilience of American
self-government.

All of us were sent to Washington to carry out the peoples business. That is
the purpose of this body. It is the meaning of our oath. And it remains our
charge to keep.

The actions of the 110th Congress will affect the security and prosperity of
our nation long after this session has ended. In this election year, let us
show our fellow Americans that we recognize our responsibilities and are
determined to meet them. And let us show them that Republicans and Democrats
can compete for votes and cooperate for results at the same time.

From expanding opportunity to protecting our country, we have made good
progress. Yet we have unfinished business before us, and the American people
expect us to get it done.

In the work ahead, we must be guided by the philosophy that made our nation
great. As Americans, we believe in the power of individuals to determine their
destiny and shape the course of history. We believe that the most reliable
guide for our country is the collective wisdom of ordinary citizens. So in all
we do, we must trust in the ability of free people to make wise decisions, and
empower them to improve their lives and their futures.

To build a prosperous future, we must trust people with their own money and
empower them to grow our economy. As we meet tonight, our economy is
undergoing a period of uncertainty. America has added jobs for a record 52
straight months, but jobs are now growing at a slower pace. Wages are up, but
so are prices for food and gas. Exports are rising, but the housing market has
declined. And at kitchen tables across our country, there is concern about our
economic future.

In the long run, Americans can be confident about our economic growth. But in
the short run, we can all see that growth is slowing. So last week, my
administration reached agreement with Speaker Pelosi and Republican Leader
Boehner on a robust growth package that includes tax relief for individuals
and families and incentives for business investment. The temptation will be to
load up the bill. That would delay it or derail it, and neither option is
acceptable. This is a good agreement that will keep our economy growing and
our people working. And this Congress must pass it as soon as possible.

We have other work to do on taxes. Unless the Congress acts, most of the tax
relief we have delivered over the past seven years will be taken away. Some in
Washington argue that letting tax relief expire is not a tax increase. Try
explaining that to 116 million American taxpayers who would see their taxes
rise by an average of $1,800. Others have said they would personally be happy
to pay higher taxes. I welcome their enthusiasm, and I am pleased to report
that the I.R.S. accepts both checks and money orders.

Most Americans think their taxes are high enough. With all the other pressures
on their finances, American families should not have to worry about the
federal government taking a bigger bite out of their paychecks. There is only
one way to eliminate this uncertainty: make the tax relief permanent. And
members of Congress should know: If any bill raising taxes reaches my desk, I
will veto it.

Just as we trust Americans with their own money, we need to earn their trust
by spending their tax dollars wisely. Next week, I will send you a budget that
terminates or substantially reduces 151 wasteful or bloated programs totaling
more than $18 billion. And this budget will keep America on track for a
surplus in 2012. American families have to balance their budgets, and so
should their government.

The peoples trust in their government is undermined by Congressional earmarks 
special interest projects that are often snuck in at the last minute, without
discussion or debate. Last year, I asked you to voluntarily cut the number and
cost of earmarks in half. I also asked you to stop slipping earmarks into
committee reports that never even come to a vote. Unfortunately, neither goal
was met. So this time, if you send me an appropriations bill that does not cut
the number and cost of earmarks in half, I will send it back to you with my
veto. And tomorrow, I will issue an Executive Order that directs federal
agencies to ignore any future earmark that is not voted on by the Congress. If
these items are truly worth funding, the Congress should debate them in the
open and hold a public vote.

Our shared responsibilities extend beyond matters of taxes and spending.

On housing, we must trust Americans with the responsibility of homeownership
and empower them to weather turbulent times in the housing market. My
administration brought together the HOPE NOW alliance, which is helping many
struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure. The Congress can help even more.
Tonight I ask you to pass legislation to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
modernize the Federal Housing Administration, and allow state housing agencies
to issue tax-free bonds to help homeowners refinance their mortgages. These
are difficult times for many American families, and by taking these steps, we
can help more of them keep their homes.

To build a future of quality health care, we must trust patients and doctors
to make medical decisions and empower them with better information and better
options. We share a common goal: making health care more affordable and
accessible for all Americans. The best way to achieve that goal is by
expanding consumer choice, not government control. So I have proposed ending
the bias in the tax code against those who do not get their health insurance
through their employer. This one reform would put private coverage within
reach for millions, and I call on the Congress to pass it this year. The
Congress must also expand health savings accounts, create Association Health
Plans for small businesses, promote health information technology, and
confront the epidemic of junk medical lawsuits. With all these steps, we will
help ensure that decisions about your medical care are made in the privacy of
your doctors office  not in the halls of Congress.

On education, we must trust students to learn if given the chance and empower
parents to demand results from our schools. In neighborhoods across our
country, there are boys and girls with dreams  and a decent education is their
only hope of achieving them. Six years ago, we came together to pass the No
Child Left Behind Act, and today no one can deny its results. Last year,
fourth and eighth graders achieved the highest math scores on record. Reading
scores are on the rise. And African-American and Hispanic students posted
all-time highs. Now we must work together to increase accountability, add
flexibility for states and districts, reduce the number of high school
dropouts, and provide extra help for struggling schools. Members of Congress:
The No Child Left Behind Act is a bipartisan achievement. It is succeeding.
And we owe it to Americas children, their parents, and their teachers to
strengthen this good law.

We must also do more to help children when their schools do not measure up.
Thanks to the D.C. Opportunity Scholarships you approved, more than 2,600 of
the poorest children in our nations capital have found new hope at a
faith-based or other non-public school. Sadly, these schools are disappearing
at an alarming rate in many of Americas inner cities. So I will convene a
White House summit aimed at strengthening these lifelines of learning. And to
open the doors of these schools to more children, I ask you to support a new
$300 million program called Pell Grants for Kids. We have seen how Pell Grants
help low-income college students realize their full potential. Together, we
have expanded the size and reach of these grants. Now lets apply that same
spirit to help liberate poor children trapped in failing public schools.

On trade, we must trust American workers to compete with anyone in the world
and empower them by opening up new markets overseas. Today, our economic
growth increasingly depends on our ability to sell American goods, crops, and
services all over the world. So we are working to break down barriers to trade
and investment wherever we can. We are working for a successful Doha round of
trade talks, and we must complete a good agreement this year. At the same
time, we are pursuing opportunities to open up new markets by passing free
trade agreements.

I thank the Congress for approving a good agreement with Peru. Now I ask you
to approve agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea. Many products
from these nations now enter America duty-free, yet many of our products face
steep tariffs in their markets. These agreements will level the playing field.
They will give us better access to nearly 100 million customers. And they will
support good jobs for the finest workers in the world: those whose products
say "Made in the USA."

These agreements also promote Americas strategic interests. The first
agreement that will come before you is with Colombia, a friend of America that
is confronting violence and terror and fighting drug traffickers. If we fail
to pass this agreement, we will embolden the purveyors of false populism in
our hemisphere. So we must come together, pass this agreement, and show our
neighbors in the region that democracy leads to a better life.

Trade brings better jobs, better choices, and better prices. Yet for some
Americans, trade can mean losing a job, and the federal government has a
responsibility to help. I ask the Congress to reauthorize and reform trade
adjustment assistance, so we can help these displaced workers learn new skills
and find new jobs.

To build a future of energy security, we must trust in the creative genius of
American researchers and entrepreneurs and empower them to pioneer a new
generation of clean energy technology. Our security, our prosperity, and our
environment all require reducing our dependence on oil. Last year, I asked you
to pass legislation to reduce oil consumption over the next decade, and you
responded. Together we should take the next steps: Let us fund new
technologies that can generate coal power while capturing carbon emissions.
Let us increase the use of renewable power and emissions-free nuclear power.
Let us continue investing in advanced battery technology and renewable fuels
to power the cars and trucks of the future. Let us create a new international
clean technology fund, which will help developing nations like India and China
make greater use of clean energy sources. And let us complete an international
agreement that has the potential to slow, stop, and eventually reverse the
growth of greenhouse gases. This agreement will be effective only if it
includes commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride. The
United States is committed to strengthening our energy security and
confronting global climate change. And the best way to meet these goals is for
America to continue leading the way toward the development of cleaner and more
efficient technology.

To keep America competitive into the future, we must trust in the skill of our
scientists and engineers and empower them to pursue the breakthroughs of
tomorrow. Last year, the Congress passed legislation supporting the American
Competitiveness Initiative, but never followed through with the funding. This
funding is essential to keeping our scientific edge. So I ask the Congress to
double federal support for critical basic research in the physical sciences
and ensure America remains the most dynamic nation on earth.

On matters of science and life, we must trust in the innovative spirit of
medical researchers and empower them to discover new treatments while
respecting moral boundaries. In November, we witnessed a landmark achievement
when scientists discovered a way to reprogram adult skin cells to act like
embryonic stem cells. This breakthrough has the potential to move us beyond
the divisive debates of the past by extending the frontiers of medicine
without the destruction of human life. So we are expanding funding for this
type of ethical medical research. And as we explore promising avenues of
research, we must also ensure that all life is treated with the dignity it
deserves. So I call on the Congress to pass legislation that bans unethical
practices such as the buying, selling, patenting, or cloning of human life.

On matters of justice, we must trust in the wisdom of our Founders and empower
judges who understand that the Constitution means what it says. I have
submitted judicial nominees who will rule by the letter of the law, not the
whim of the gavel. Many of these nominees are being unfairly delayed. They are
worthy of confirmation, and the Senate should give each of them a prompt
up-or-down vote.

In communities across our land, we must trust in the good heart of the
American people and empower them to serve their neighbors in need. Over the
past seven years, more of our fellow citizens have discovered that the pursuit
of happiness leads to the path of service. Americans have volunteered in
record numbers. Charitable donations are higher than ever. Faith-based groups
are bringing hope to pockets of despair, with newfound support from the
federal government. And to help guarantee equal treatment for faith-based
organizations when they compete for federal funds, I ask you to permanently
extend Charitable Choice.

Tonight the armies of compassion continue the march to a new day in the Gulf
Coast. America honors the strength and resilience of the people of this
region. We reaffirm our pledge to help them build stronger and better than
before. And tonight I am pleased to announce that in April we will host this
years North American Summit of Canada, Mexico, and the United States in the
great city of New Orleans.

There are two other pressing challenges that I have raised repeatedly before
this body, and that this body has failed to address: entitlement spending and
immigration.

Every Member in this chamber knows that spending on entitlement programs like
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid is growing faster than we can afford.
And we all know the painful choices ahead if America stays on this path:
massive tax increases, sudden and drastic cuts in benefits, or crippling
deficits. I have laid out proposals to reform these programs. Now I ask
members of Congress to offer your proposals and come up with a bipartisan
solution to save these vital programs for our children and grandchildren.

The other pressing challenge is immigration. America needs to secure our
borders  and with your help, my administration is taking steps to do so. We
are increasing work site enforcement, we are deploying fences and advanced
technologies to stop illegal crossings, we have effectively ended the policy
of "catch and release" at the border, and by the end of this year, we will
have doubled the number of border patrol agents. Yet we also need to
acknowledge that we will never fully secure our border until we create a
lawful way for foreign workers to come here and support our economy. This will
take pressure off the border and allow law enforcement to concentrate on those
who mean us harm. We must also find a sensible and humane way to deal with
people here illegally. Illegal immigration is complicated, but it can be
resolved. And it must be resolved in a way that upholds both our laws and our
highest ideals.

This is the business of our nation here at home. Yet building a prosperous
future for our citizens also depends on confronting enemies abroad and
advancing liberty in troubled regions of the world.

Our foreign policy is based on a clear premise: We trust that people, when
given the chance, will choose a future of freedom and peace. In the last seven
years, we have witnessed stirring moments in the history of liberty. We have
seen citizens in Georgia and Ukraine stand up for their right to free and fair
elections. We have seen people in Lebanon take to the streets to demand their
independence. We have seen Afghans emerge from the tyranny of the Taliban to
choose a new president and a new parliament. We have seen jubilant Iraqis
holding up ink-stained fingers and celebrating their freedom. And these images
of liberty have inspired us.

In the past seven years, we have also seen images that have sobered us. We
have watched throngs of mourners in Lebanon and Pakistan carrying the caskets
of beloved leaders taken by the assassins hand. We have seen wedding guests in
blood-soaked finery staggering from a hotel in Jordan, Afghans and Iraqis
blown up in mosques and markets, and trains in London and Madrid ripped apart
by bombs. And on a clear September day, we saw thousands of our fellow
citizens taken from us in an instant. These horrific images serve as a grim
reminder: The advance of liberty is opposed by terrorists and extremists  evil
men who despise freedom, despise America, and aim to subject millions to their
violent rule.

Since September 11, we have taken the fight to these terrorists and
extremists. We will stay on the offense, we will keep up the pressure, and we
will deliver justice to the enemies of America.

We are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st century. The
terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and decency that we hold dear.
Yet in this war on terror, there is one thing we and our enemies agree on: In
the long run, men and women who are free to determine their own destinies will
reject terror and refuse to live in tyranny. That is why the terrorists are
fighting to deny this choice to people in Lebanon,

Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Palestinian Territories. And that is why,
for the security of America and the peace of the world, we are spreading the
hope of freedom.

In Afghanistan, America, our 25 NATO allies, and 15 partner nations are
helping the Afghan people defend their freedom and rebuild their country.
Thanks to the courage of these military and civilian personnel, a nation that
was once a safe haven for Al Qaeda is now a young democracy where boys and
girls are going to school, new roads and hospitals are being built, and people
are looking to the future with new hope. These successes must continue, so we
are adding 3,200 Marines to our forces in Afghanistan, where they will fight
the terrorists and train the Afghan Army and police. Defeating the Taliban and
Al Qaeda is critical to our security, and I thank the Congress for supporting
Americas vital mission in Afghanistan.

In Iraq, the terrorists and extremists are fighting to deny a proud people
their liberty and to establish safe havens for attacks across the world. One
year ago, our enemies were succeeding in their efforts to plunge Iraq into
chaos. So we reviewed our strategy and changed course. We launched a surge of
American forces into Iraq. And we gave our troops a new mission: Work with
Iraqi forces to protect the Iraqi people, pursue the enemy in its strongholds,
and deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country.

The Iraqi people quickly realized that something dramatic had happened. Those
who had worried that America was preparing to abandon them instead saw tens of
thousands of American forces flowing into their country. They saw our forces
moving into neighborhoods, clearing out the terrorists, and staying behind to
ensure the enemy did not return. And they saw our troops, along with
provincial reconstruction teams that include foreign service officers and
other skilled public servants, coming in to ensure that improved security was
followed by improvements in daily life. Our military and civilians in Iraq are
performing with courage and distinction, and they have the gratitude of our
whole nation.

The Iraqis launched a surge of their own. In the fall of 2006, Sunni tribal
leaders grew tired of Al Qaedas brutality and started a popular uprising
called "the Anbar Awakening." Over the past year, similar movements have
spread across the country. And today, this grass-roots surge includes more
than 80,000 Iraqi citizens who are fighting the terrorists. The government in
Baghdad has stepped forward as well  adding more than 100,000 new Iraqi
soldiers and police during the past year.

While the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains, the American and
Iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could have imagined just one year
ago:

When we met last year, many said containing the violence was impossible. A
year later, high profile terrorist attacks are down, civilian deaths are down,
and sectarian killings are down.

When we met last year, militia extremists  some armed and trained by Iran 
were wreaking havoc in large areas of Iraq. A year later, coalition and Iraqi
forces have killed or captured hundreds of militia fighters. And Iraqis of all
backgrounds increasingly realize that defeating these militia fighters is
critical to the future of their country.

When we met last year, Al Qaeda had sanctuaries in many areas of Iraq, and
their leaders had just offered American forces safe passage out of the
country. Today, it is Al Qaeda that is searching for safe passage. They have
been driven from many of the strongholds they once held, and over the past
year, we have captured or killed thousands of extremists in Iraq, including
hundreds of key Al Qaeda leaders and operatives. Last month, Osama bin Laden
released a tape in which he railed against Iraqi tribal leaders who have
turned on Al Qaeda and admitted that Coalition forces are growing stronger in
Iraq. Ladies and gentlemen, some may deny the surge is working, but among the
terrorists there is no doubt. Al Qaeda is on the run in Iraq, and this enemy
will be defeated.

When we met last year, our troop levels in Iraq were on the rise. Today,
because of the progress just described, we are implementing a policy of
"return on success," and the surge forces we sent to Iraq are beginning to
come home.

This progress is a credit to the valor of our troops and the brilliance of
their commanders. This evening, I want to speak directly to our men and women
on the front lines. Soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and coast guardsmen:
In the past year, you have done everything we have asked of you, and more. Our
nation is grateful for your courage. We are proud of your accomplishments. And
tonight in this hallowed chamber, with the American people as our witness, we
make you a solemn pledge: In the fight ahead, you will have all you need to
protect our nation. And I ask the Congress to meet its responsibilities to
these brave men and women by fully funding our troops.

Our enemies in Iraq have been hit hard. They are not yet defeated, and we can
still expect tough fighting ahead. Our objective in the coming year is to
sustain and build on the gains we made in 2007, while transitioning to the
next phase of our strategy. American troops are shifting from leading
operations, to partnering with Iraqi forces, and, eventually, to a protective
overwatch mission. As part of this transition, one Army brigade combat team
and one Marine Expeditionary Unit have already come home and will not be
replaced. In the coming months, four additional brigades and two Marine
battalions will follow suit. Taken together, this means more than 20,000 of
our troops are coming home.

Any further drawdown of U.S. troops will be based on conditions in Iraq and
the recommendations of our commanders. General Petraeus has warned that too
fast a drawdown could result in the "disintegration of the Iraqi Security
Forces, Al Qaeda-Iraq regaining lost ground, (and) a marked increase in
violence." Members of Congress: Having come so far and achieved so much, we
must not allow this to happen.

In the coming year, we will work with Iraqi leaders as they build on the
progress they are making toward political reconciliation. At the local level,
Sunnis, Shia and Kurds are beginning to come together to reclaim their
communities and rebuild their lives. Progress in the provinces must be matched
by progress in Baghdad. And we are seeing some encouraging signs. The national
government is sharing oil revenues with the provinces. The parliament recently
passed both a pension law and de-Baathification reform. Now they are debating
a provincial powers law. The Iraqis still have a distance to travel. But after
decades of dictatorship and the pain of sectarian violence, reconciliation is
taking place  and the Iraqi people are taking control of their future.

The mission in Iraq has been difficult and trying for our nation. But it is in
the vital interest of the United States that we succeed. A free Iraq will deny
Al Qaeda a safe haven. A free Iraq will show millions across the Middle East
that a future of liberty is possible. And a free Iraq will be a friend of
America, a partner in fighting terror, and a source of stability in a
dangerous part of the world.

By contrast, a failed Iraq would embolden extremists, strengthen Iran, and
give terrorists a base from which to launch new attacks on our friends, our
allies, and our homeland. The enemy has made its intentions clear. At a time
when the momentum seemed to favor them, Al Qaedas top commander in Iraq
declared that they will not rest until they have attacked us here in
Washington. My fellow Americans: We will not rest either. We will not rest
until this enemy has been defeated. We must do the difficult work today, so
that years from now people will look back and say that this generation rose to
the moment, prevailed in a tough fight, and left behind a more hopeful region
and a safer America.

We are also standing against the forces of extremism in the Holy Land, where
we have new cause for hope. Palestinians have elected a president who
recognizes that confronting terror is essential to achieving a state where his
people can live in dignity and at peace with Israel. Israelis have leaders who
recognize that a peaceful, democratic Palestinian state will be a source of
lasting security. This month in Ramallah and Jerusalem, I assured leaders from
both sides that America will do, and I will do, everything we can to help them
achieve a peace agreement that defines a Palestinian state by the end of this
year. The time has come for a Holy Land where a democratic Israel and a
democratic Palestine live side-by-side in peace.

We are also standing against the forces of extremism embodied by the regime in
Tehran. Irans rulers oppress a good and talented people. And wherever freedom
advances in the Middle East, it seems the Iranian regime is there to oppose
it. Iran is funding and training militia groups in Iraq, supporting Hezbollah
terrorists in Lebanon, and backing Hamas efforts to undermine peace in the
Holy Land. Tehran is also developing ballistic missiles of increasing range
and continues to develop its capability to enrich uranium, which could be used
to create a nuclear weapon. Our message to the people of Iran is clear: We
have no quarrel with you, we respect your traditions and your history, and we
look forward to the day when you have your freedom. Our message to the leaders
of Iran is also clear: Verifiably suspend your nuclear enrichment, so
negotiations can begin. And to rejoin the community of nations, come clean
about your nuclear intentions and past actions, stop your oppression at home,
and cease your support for terror abroad. But above all, know this: America
will confront those who threaten our troops, we will stand by our allies, and
we will defend our vital interests in the Persian Gulf.

On the home front, we will continue to take every lawful and effective measure
to protect our country. This is our most solemn duty. We are grateful that
there has not been another attack on our soil since September 11. This is not
for a lack of desire or effort on the part of the enemy. In the past six
years, we have stopped numerous attacks, including a plot to fly a plane into
the tallest building in Los Angeles and another to blow up passenger jets
bound for America over the Atlantic. Dedicated men and women in our government
toil day and night to stop the terrorists from carrying out their plans. These
good citizens are saving American lives, and everyone in this chamber owes
them our thanks. And we owe them something more: We owe them the tools they
need to keep our people safe.

One of the most important tools we can give them is the ability to monitor
terrorist communications. To protect America, we need to know who the
terrorists are talking to, what they are saying, and what they are planning.
Last year, the Congress passed legislation to help us do that. Unfortunately,
the Congress set the legislation to expire on February 1. This means that if
you do not act by Friday, our ability to track terrorist threats would be
weakened and our citizens will be in greater danger. The Congress must ensure
the flow of vital intelligence is not disrupted. The Congress must pass
liability protection for companies believed to have assisted in the efforts to
defend America. We have had ample time for debate. The time to act is now.

Protecting our nation from the dangers of a new century requires more than
good intelligence and a strong military. It also requires changing the
conditions that breed resentment and allow extremists to prey on despair. So
America is using its influence to build a freer, more hopeful, and more
compassionate world. This is a reflection of our national interest and the
calling of our conscience.

America is opposing genocide in Sudan and supporting freedom in countries from
Cuba and Zimbabwe to Belarus and Burma.

America is leading the fight against global poverty, with strong education
initiatives and humanitarian assistance. We have also changed the way we
deliver aid by launching the Millennium Challenge Account. This program
strengthens democracy, transparency, and the rule of law in developing
nations, and I ask you to fully fund this important initiative.

America is leading the fight against global hunger. Today, more than half the
worlds food aid comes from the United States. And tonight, I ask the Congress
to support an innovative proposal to provide food assistance by purchasing
crops directly from farmers in the developing world, so we can build up local
agriculture and help break the cycle of famine.

America is leading the fight against disease. With your help, we are working
to cut by half the number of malaria-related deaths in 15 African nations. And
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief is treating 1.4 million people. We can
bring healing and hope to many more. So I ask you to maintain the principles
that have changed behavior and made this program a success. And I call on you
to double our initial commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS by approving an
additional $30 billion over the next 5 years.

America is a force for hope in the world because we are a compassionate
people, and some of the most compassionate Americans are those who have
stepped forward to protect us. We must keep faith with all who have risked
life and limb so that we might live in freedom and peace. Over the past seven
years, we have increased funding for veterans by more than 95 percent. As we
increase funding, we must also reform our veterans system to meet the needs of
a new war and a new generation. I call on the Congress to enact the reforms
recommended by Senator Bob Dole and Secretary Donna Shalala, so we can improve
the system of care for our wounded warriors and help them build lives of hope,
promise, and dignity.

Our military families also sacrifice for America. They endure sleepless nights
and the daily struggle of providing for children while a loved one is serving
far from home. We have a responsibility to provide for them. So I ask you to
join me in expanding their access to child care, creating new hiring
preferences for military spouses across the federal government, and allowing
our troops to transfer their unused education benefits to their spouses or
children. Our military families serve our nation, they inspire our nation, and
tonight our nation honors them.

The secret of our strength, the miracle of America, is that our greatness lies
not in our government, but in the spirit and determination of our people. When
the Federal Convention met in Philadelphia in 1787, our nation was bound by
the Articles of Confederation, which began with the words, "We the undersigned
delegates." When Gouverneur Morris was asked to draft the preamble to our new
Constitution, he offered an important revision and opened with words that
changed the course of our nation and the history of the world: "We the
people."

By trusting the people, our Founders wagered that a great and noble nation
could be built on the liberty that resides in the hearts of all men and women.
By trusting the people, succeeding generations transformed our fragile young
democracy into the most powerful nation on earth and a beacon of hope for
millions. And so long as we continue to trust the people, our nation will
prosper, our liberty will be secure, and the State of our Union will remain
strong. So tonight, with confidence in freedoms power, and trust in the
people, let us set forth to do their business.
Two years ago today we had the first caucus in Iowa, and one year ago
tomorrow, I walked from here to the White House to take up the duties of
President of the United States. I didn't know it then when I walked, but
I've been trying to save energy ever since.

I return tonight to fulfill one of those duties of the Constitution: to
give to the Congress, and to the Nation, information on the state of the
Union.

Militarily, politically, economically, and in spirit, the state of our
Union is sound.

We are a great country, a strong country, a vital and dynamic country, and
so we will remain.

We are a confident people and a hardworking people, a decent and a
compassionate people, and so we will remain.

I want to speak to you tonight about where we are and where we must go,
about what we have done and what we must do. And I want to pledge to you my
best efforts and ask you to pledge yours.

Each generation of Americans has to face circumstances not of its own
choosing, but by which its character is measured and its spirit is tested.

There are times of emergency, when a nation and its leaders must bring
their energies to bear on a single urgent task. That was the duty Abraham
Lincoln faced when our land was torn apart by conflict in the War Between
the States. That was the duty faced by Franklin Roosevelt when he led
America out of an economic depression and again when he led America to
victory in war.

There are other times when there is no single overwhelming crisis, yet
profound national interests are at stake.

At such times the risk of inaction can be equally great. It becomes the
task of leaders to call forth the vast and restless energies of our people
to build for the future.

That is what Harry Truman did in the years after the Second World War, when
we helped Europe and Japan rebuild themselves and secured an international
order that has protected freedom from aggression.

We live in such times now, and we face such duties.

We've come through a long period of turmoil and doubt, but we've once again
found our moral course, and with a new spirit, we are striving to express
our best instincts to the rest of the world.

There is all across our land a growing sense of peace and a sense of common
purpose. This sense of unity cannot be expressed in programs or in
legislation or in dollars. It's an achievement that belongs to every
individual American. This unity ties together, and it towers over all our
efforts here in Washington, and it serves as an inspiring beacon for all of
us who are elected to serve.

This new atmosphere demands a new spirit, a partnership between those of us
who lead and those who elect. The foundations of this partnership are
truth, the courage to face hard decisions, concern for one another and the
common good over special interests, and a basic faith and trust in the
wisdom and strength and judgment of the American people.

For the first time in a generation, we are not haunted by a major
international crisis or by domestic turmoil, and we now have a rare and a
priceless opportunity to address persistent problems and burdens which come
to us as a nation, quietly and steadily getting worse over the years.

As President, I've had to ask you, the Members of Congress, and you, the
American people, to come to grips with some of the most difficult and hard
questions facing our society.

We must make a maximum effort, because if we do not aim for the best, we
are very likely to achieve little. I see no benefit to the country if we
delay, because the problems will only get worse.

We need patience and good will, but we really need to realize that there is
a limit to the role and the function of government. Government cannot solve
our problems, it can't set our goals, it cannot define our vision.
Government cannot eliminate poverty or provide a bountiful economy or
reduce inflation or save our cities or cure illiteracy or provide energy.
And government cannot mandate goodness. Only a true partnership between
government and the people can ever hope to reach these goals.

Those of us who govern can sometimes inspire, and we can identify needs and
marshal resources, but we simply cannot be the managers of everything and
everybody.

We here in Washington must move away from crisis management, and we must
establish clear goals for the future, immediate and the distant future,
which will let us work together and not in conflict. Never again should we
neglect a growing crisis like the shortage of energy, where further delay
will only lead to more harsh and painful solutions.

Every day we spend more than $120 million for foreign oil. This slows our
economic growth, it lowers the value of the dollar overseas, and it
aggravates unemployment and inflation here at home.

Now we know what we must do, increase production. We must cut down on
waste. And we must use more of those fuels which are plentiful and more
permanent. We must be fair to people, and we must not disrupt our Nation's
economy and our budget.

Now, that sounds simple. But I recognize the difficulties involved. I know
that it is not easy for the Congress to act. But the fact remains that on
the energy legislation, we have failed the American people. Almost 5 years
after the oil embargo dramatized the problem for us all, we still do not
have a national energy program. Not much longer can we tolerate this
stalemate. It undermines our national interest both at home and abroad. We
must succeed, and I believe we will.

Our main task at home this year, with energy a central element, is the
Nation's economy. We must continue the recovery and further cut
unemployment and inflation.

Last year was a good one for the United States. We reached all of our major
economic goals for 1977. Four million new jobs were created, an alltime
record, and the number of unemployed dropped by more than a million.
Unemployment right now is the lowest it has been since 1974, and not since
World War II has such a high percentage of American people been employed.

The rate of inflation went down. There was a good growth in business
profits and investments, the source of more jobs for our workers, and a
higher standard of living for all our people. After taxes and inflation,
there was a healthy increase in workers' wages.

And this year, our country will have the first $2 trillion economy in the
history of the world.

Now, we are proud of this progress the first year, but we must do even
better in the future.

We still have serious problems on which all of us must work together. Our
trade deficit is too large. Inflation is still too high, and too many
Americans still do not have a job.

Now, I didn't have any simple answers for all these problems. But we have
developed an economic policy that is working, because it's simple,
balanced, and fair. It's based on four principles: First, the economy must
keep on expanding to produce new jobs and better income, which our people
need. The fruits of growth must be widely shared. More jobs must be made
available to those who have been bypassed until now. And the tax system
must be made fairer and simpler.

Secondly, private business and not the Government must lead the expansion
in the future.

Third, we must lower the rate of inflation and keep it down. Inflation
slows down economic growth, and it's the most cruel to the poor and also to
the elderly and others who live on fixed incomes.

And fourth, we must contribute to the strength of the world economy.

I will announce detailed proposals for improving our tax system later this
week. We can make our tax laws fairer, we can make them simpler and easier
to understand, and at the same time, we can, and we will, reduce the tax
burden on American citizens by $25 billion.

The tax reforms and the tax reductions go together. Only with the long
overdue reforms will the full tax cut be advisable.

Almost $17 billion in income tax cuts will go to individuals. Ninety-six
percent of all American taxpayers will see their taxes go down. For a
typical family of four, this means an annual saving of more than $250 a
year, or a tax reduction of about 20 percent. A further $2 billion cut in
excise taxes will give more relief and also contribute directly to lowering
the rate of inflation.

And we will also provide strong additional incentives for business
investment and growth through substantial cuts in the corporate tax rates
and improvement in the investment tax credit.

Now, these tax proposals will increase opportunity everywhere in the
Nation. But additional jobs for the disadvantaged deserve special
attention.

We've already passed laws to assure equal access to the voting booth and to
restaurants and to schools, to housing, and laws to permit access to jobs.
But job opportunity, the chance to earn a decent living, is also a basic
human right, which we cannot and will not ignore.

A major priority for our Nation is the final elimination of the barriers
that restrict the opportunities available to women and also to black people
and Hispanics and other minorities. We've come a long way toward that goal.
But there is still much to do. What we inherited from the past must not be
permitted to shackle us in the future.

I'll be asking you for a substantial increase in funds for public jobs for
our young people, and I also am recommending that the Congress continue the
public service employment programs at more than twice the level of a year
ago. When welfare reform is completed, we will have more than a million
additional jobs so that those on welfare who are able to work can work.

However, again, we know that in our free society, private business is still
the best source of new jobs. Therefore, I will propose a new program to
encourage businesses to hire young and disadvantaged Americans. These young
people only need skills and a chance in order to take their place in our
economic system. Let's give them the chance they need. A major step in the
right direction would be the early passage of a greatly improved
Humphrey-Hawkins bill.

My budget for 1979 addresses these national needs, but it is lean and
tight. I have cut waste wherever possible.

I am proposing an increase of less than 2 percent after adjusting for
inflation, the smallest increase in the Federal budget in 4 years.

Lately, Federal spending has taken a steadily increasing portion of what
Americans produce. Our new budget reverses that trend, and later I hope to
bring the Government's toll down even further. And with your help, we'll do
that.

In time of high employment and a strong economy, deficit spending should
not be a feature of our budget. As the economy continues to gain strength
and as our unemployment rates continue to fall, revenues will grow. With
careful planning, efficient management, and proper restraint on spending,
we can move rapidly toward a balanced budget, and we will.

Next year the budget deficit will be only slightly less than this year. But
one-third of the deficit is due to the necessary tax cuts that I've
proposed. This year the right choice is to reduce the burden on taxpayers
and provide more jobs for our people.

The third element in our program is a renewed attack on inflation. We've
learned the hard way that high unemployment will not prevent or cure
inflation. Government can help us by stimulating private investment and by
maintaining a responsible economic policy. Through a new top-level review
process, we will do a better job of reducing Government regulation that
drives up costs and drives up prices.

But again, Government alone cannot bring down the rate of inflation. When a
level of high inflation is expected to continue, then companies raise
prices to protect their profit margins against prospective increases in
wages and other costs, while workers demand higher wages as protection
against expected price increases. It's like an escalation in the arms race,
and understandably, no one wants to disarm alone.

Now, no one firm or a group of workers can halt this process. It's an
effort that we must all make together. I'm therefore asking government,
business, labor, and other groups to join in a voluntary program to
moderate inflation by holding wage and price increases in each sector of
the economy during 1978 below the average increases of the last 2 years.

I do not believe in wage and price controls. A sincere commitment to
voluntary constraint provides a way, perhaps the only way, to fight
inflation without Government interference.

As I came into the Capitol tonight, I saw the farmers, my fellow farmers,
standing out in the snow. I'm familiar with their problem, and I know from
Congress' action that you are too. When I was running Carters Warehouse, we
had spread on our own farms 5-10-15 fertilizer for about $40 a ton. The
last time I was home, the price was about $100 a ton. The cost of nitrogen
has gone up 150 percent, and the price of products that farmers sell has
either stayed the same or gone down a little.

Now, this past year in 1977, you, the Congress, and I together passed a new
agricultural act. It went into effect October 1. It'll have its first
impact on the 1978 crops. It will help a great deal. It'll add $6 1/2
billion or more to help the farmers with their price supports and target
prices.

Last year we had the highest level of exports of farm products in the
history of our country, $24 billion. We expect to have more this year.
We'll be working together. But I think it's incumbent on us to monitor very
carefully the farm situation and continue to work harmoniously with the
farmers of our country. What's best for the farmers, the farm families, in
the long run is also best for the consumers of our country.

Economic success at home is also the key to success in our international
economic policy. An effective energy program, strong investment and
productivity, and controlled inflation will provide (improve) our trade
balance and balance it, and it will help to protect the integrity of the
dollar overseas.

By working closely with our friends abroad, we can promote the economic
health of the whole world, with fair and balanced agreements lowering the
barriers to trade.

Despite the inevitable pressures that build up when the world economy
suffers from high unemployment, we must firmly resist the demands for
self-defeating protectionism. But free trade must also be fair trade. And I
am determined to protect American industry and American workers against
foreign trade practices which are unfair or illegal.

In a separate written message to Congress, I've outlined other domestic
initiatives, such as welfare reform, consumer protection, basic education
skills, urban policy, reform of our labor laws, and national health care
later on this year. I will not repeat these tonight. But there are several
other points that I would like to make directly to you.

During these past years, Americans have seen our Government grow far from
us.

For some citizens, the Government has almost become like a foreign country,
so strange and distant that we've often had to deal with it through trained
ambassadors who have sometimes become too powerful and too influential,
lawyers, accountants, and lobbyists. This cannot go on.

We must have what Abraham Lincoln wanted, a government for the people.

We've made progress toward that kind of government. You've given me the
authority I requested to reorganize the Federal bureaucracy. And I am using
that authority.

We've already begun a series of reorganization plans which will be
completed over a period of 3 years. We have also proposed abolishing almost
500 Federal advisory and other commissions and boards. But I know that the
American people are still sick and tired of Federal paperwork and redtape.
Bit by bit we are chopping down the thicket of unnecessary Federal
regulations by which Government too often interferes in our personal lives
and our personal business. We've cut the public's Federal paperwork load by
more than 12 percent in less than a year. And we are not through cutting.

We've made a good start on turning the gobbledygook of Federal regulations
into plain English that people can understand. But we know that we still
have a long way to go.

We've brought together parts of 11 Government agencies to create a new
Department of Energy. And now it's time to take another major step by
creating a separate Department of Education.

But even the best organized Government will only be as effective as the
people who carry out its policies. For this reason, I consider civil
service reform to be absolutely vital. Worked out with the civil servants
themselves, this reorganization plan will restore the merit principle to a
system which has grown into a bureaucratic maze. It will provide greater
management flexibility and better rewards for better performance without
compromising job security.

Then and only then can we have a government that is efficient, open, and
truly worthy of our people's understanding and respect. I have promised
that we will have such a government, and I intend to keep that promise.

In our foreign policy, the separation of people from government has been in
the past a source of weakness and error. In a democratic system like ours,
foreign policy decisions must be able to stand the test of public
examination and public debate. If we make a mistake in this administration,
it will be on the side of frankness and openness with the American people.

In our modern world, when the deaths of literally millions of people can
result from a few terrifying seconds of destruction, the path of national
strength and security is identical to the path of peace.

Tonight, I am happy to report that because we are strong, our Nation is at
peace with the world.

We are a confident nation. We've restored a moral basis for our foreign
policy. The very heart of our identity as a nation is our firm commitment
to human rights.

We stand for human rights because we believe that government has as a
purpose to promote the well-being of its citizens. This is true in our
domestic policy; it's also true in our foreign policy. The world must know
that in support of human rights, the United States will stand firm.

We expect no quick or easy results, but there has been significant movement
toward greater freedom and humanity in several parts of the world.

Thousands of political prisoners have been freed. The leaders of the world,
even our ideological adversaries, now see that their attitude toward
fundamental human rights affects their standing in the international
community, and it affects their relations with the United States.

To serve the interests of every American, our foreign policy has three
major goals.

The first and prime concern is and will remain the security of our
country.

Security is based on our national will, and security is based on the
strength of our Armed Forces. We have the will, and militarily we are very
strong.

Security also comes through the strength of our alliances. We have
reconfirmed our commitment to the defense of Europe, and this year we will
demonstrate that commitment by further modernizing and strengthening our
military capabilities there.

Security can also be enhanced by agreements with potential adversaries
which reduce the threat of nuclear disaster while maintaining our own
relative strategic capability.

In areas of peaceful competition with the Soviet Union, we will continue to
more than hold our own.

At the same time, we are negotiating with quiet confidence, without haste,
with careful determination, to ease the tensions between us and to ensure
greater stability and security.

The strategic arms limitation talks have been long and difficult. We want a
mutual limit on both the quality and the quantity of the giant nuclear
arsenals of both nations, and then we want actual reductions in strategic
arms as a major step toward the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons
from the face of the Earth.

If these talks result in an agreement this year, and I trust they will, I
pledge to you that the agreement will maintain and enhance the stability of
the world's strategic balance and the security of the United States.

For 30 years, concerted but unsuccessful efforts have been made to ban the
testing of atomic explosives, both military weapons and peaceful nuclear
devices.

We are hard at work with Great Britain and the Soviet Union on an agreement
which will stop testing and will protect our national security and provide
for adequate verification of compliance. We are now making, I believe, good
progress toward this comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions.

We are also working vigorously to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons
among the nations of the world which do not now have them and to reduce the
deadly global traffic in conventional arms sales. Our stand for peace is
suspect if we are also the principal arms merchant of the world. So, we've
decided to cut down our arms transfers abroad on a year-by-year basis and
to work with other major arms exporters to encourage their similar
constraint.

Every American has a stake in our second major goal, a world at peace. In a
nuclear age, each of us is threatened when peace is not secured everywhere.
We are trying to promote harmony in those parts of the world where major
differences exist among other nations and threaten international peace.

In the Middle East, we are contributing our good offices to maintain the
momentum of the current negotiations and to keep open the lines of
communication among the Middle Eastern leaders. The whole world has a great
stake in the success of these efforts. This is a precious opportunity for a
historic settlement of a longstanding conflict, an opportunity which may
never come again in our lifetime.

Our role has been difficult and sometimes thankless and controversial. But
it has been constructive and it has been necessary, and it will continue.

Our third major foreign policy goal is one that touches the life of every
American citizen every day, world economic growth and stability.

This requires strong economic performance by the industrialized democracies
like ourselves and progress in resolving the global energy crisis. Last
fall, with the help of others, we succeeded in our vigorous efforts to
maintain the stability of the price of oil. But as many foreign leaders
have emphasized to me personally and, I am sure, to you, the greatest
future contribution that America can make to the world economy would be an
effective energy conservation program here at home. We will not hesitate to
take the actions needed to protect the integrity of the American dollar.

We are trying to develop a more just international system. And in this
spirit, we are supporting the struggle for human development in Africa, in
Asia, and in Latin America.

Finally, the world is watching to see how we act on one of our most
important and controversial items of business, approval of the Panama Canal
treaties. The treaties now before the Senate are the result of the work of
four administrations, two Democratic, two Republican.

They guarantee that the canal will be open always for unrestricted use by
the ships of the world. Our ships have the right to go to the head of the
line for priority of passage in times of emergency or need. We retain the
permanent right to defend the canal with our own military forces, if
necessary, to guarantee its openness and its neutrality.

The treaties are to the clear advantage of ourselves, the Panamanians, and
the other users of the canal. Ratifying the Panama Canal treaties will
demonstrate our good faith to the world, discourage the spread of hostile
ideologies in this hemisphere, and directly contribute to the economic
well-being and the security of the United States.

I have to say that that's very welcome applause.

There were two moments on my recent journey which, for me, confirmed the
final aims of our foreign policy and what it always must be.

One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as passionately
attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose children have a
far smaller chance for good health or food or education or human
fulfillment than a child born in this country.

The other moment was in Warsaw, capital of a nation twice devastated by war
in this century. There, people have rebuilt the city which war's
destruction took from them. But what was new only emphasized clearly what
was lost.

What I saw in those two places crystalized for me the purposes of our own
Nation's policy: to ensure economic justice, to advance human rights, to
resolve conflicts without violence, and to proclaim in our great democracy
our constant faith in the liberty and dignity of human beings everywhere.

We Americans have a great deal of work to do together. In the end, how well
we do that work will depend on the spirit in which we approach it. We must
seek fresh answers, unhindered by the stale prescriptions of the past.

It has been said that our best years are behind us. But I say again that
America's best is still ahead. We have emerged from bitter experiences
chastened but proud, confident once again, ready to face challenges once
again, and united once again.

We come together tonight at a solemn time. Last week the Senate lost a good
and honest man, Lee Metcalf of Montana.

And today, the flag of the United States flew at half-mast from this
Capitol and from American installations and ships all over the world, in
mourning for Senator Hubert Humphrey.

Because he exemplified so well the joy and the zest of living, his death
reminds us not so much of our own mortality, but of the possibilities
offered to us by life. He always looked to the future with a special
American kind of confidence, of hope and enthusiasm. And the best way that
we can honor him is by following his example.

Our task, to use the words of Senator Humphrey, is "reconciliation,
rebuilding, and rebirth."

Reconciliation of private needs and interests into a higher purpose.

Rebuilding the old dreams of justice and liberty, and country and
community.

Rebirth of our faith in the common good.

Each of us here tonight, and all who are listening in your homes, must
rededicate ourselves to serving the common good. We are a community, a
beloved community, all of us. Our individual fates are linked, our futures
intertwined. And if we act in that knowledge and in that spirit, together,
as the Bible says, we can move mountains.

Thank you very much.
Tonight I want to examine in a broad sense the state of our American
Union--how we are building a new foundation for a peaceful and a prosperous
world.

Our children who will be born this year will come of age in the 21st
century. What kind of society, what kind of world are we building for them?
Will we ourselves be at peace? Will our children enjoy a better quality of
life? Will a strong and united America still be a force for freedom and
prosperity around the world?

Tonight, there is every sign that the state of our Union is sound.

Our economy offers greater prosperity for more of our people than ever
before. Real per capita income and real business profits have risen
substantially in the last 2 years. Farm exports are setting an all-time
record each year, and farm income last year, net farm income, was up more
than 25 percent.

Our liberties are secure. Our military defenses are strong and growing
stronger. And more importantly, tonight, America--our beloved country--is
at peace.

Our earliest national commitments, modified and reshaped by succeeding
generations, have served us well. But the problems that we face today are
different from those that confronted earlier generations of Americans. They
are more subtle, more complex, and more interrelated. At home, we are
recognizing ever more clearly that government alone cannot solve these
problems. And abroad, few of them can be solved by the United States alone.
But Americans as a united people, working with our allies and friends, have
never been afraid to face problems and to solve problems, either here or
abroad.

The challenge to us is to build a new and firmer foundation for the
future--for a sound economy, for a more effective government, for more
political trust, and for a stable peace--so that the America our children
inherit will be even stronger and even better than it is today.

We cannot resort to simplistic or extreme solutions which substitute myths
for common sense.

In our economy, it is a myth that we must choose endlessly between
inflation and recession. Together, we build the foundation for a strong
economy, with lower inflation, without contriving either a recession with
its high unemployment or unworkable, mandatory government controls.

In our government, it is a myth that we must choose between compassion and
competence. Together, we build the foundation for a government that works,
and works for people.

In our relations with our potential adversaries, it is a myth that we must
choose between confrontation and capitulation. Together, we build the
foundation for a stable world of both diversity and peace.

Together, we've already begun to build the foundation for confidence in our
economic system. During the last 2 years, in bringing our economy out of
the deepest recession since the 1930's, we've created 7,100,000 new jobs.
The unemployment rate has gone down 25 percent. And now we must redouble
our fight against the persistent inflation that has wracked our country for
more than a decade. That's our important domestic issue, and we must do it
together.

We know that inflation is a burden for all Americans, but it's a disaster
for the poor, the sick, and the old. No American family should be forced to
choose among food, warmth, health care, or decent housing because the cost
of any of these basic necessities has climbed out of reach.

Three months ago, I outlined to the Nation a balanced anti-inflation
program that couples responsible government restraint with responsible wage
and price restraint. It's based upon my knowledge that there is a more
powerful force than government compulsion--the force created by the
cooperative efforts of millions of Americans working toward a common goal.

Business and labor have been increasingly supportive. It's imperative that
we in government do our part. We must stop excessive government growth, and
we must control government spending habits.

I've sent to this Congress a stringent but a fair budget, one that, since I
ran for President in 1976, will have cut the Federal deficit in half. And
as a percentage of our gross national product, the deficit will have
dropped by almost 75 percent.

This Congress had a good record last year, and I now ask the 96th Congress
to continue this partnership in holding the line on excess Federal
spending. It will not be easy. But we must be strong, and we must be
persistent.

This budget is a clear message that, with the help of you and the American
people, I am determined, as President, to bring inflation under control.

The 1980 budget provides enough spending restraint to begin unwinding
inflation, but enough support for our country to keep American workers
productive and to encourage the investments that provide new jobs. We will
continue to mobilize our Nation's resources to reduce our trade deficit
substantially this year and to maintain the strength of the American
dollar.

We've demonstrated in this restrained budget that we can build on the gains
of the past 2 years to provide additional support to educate disadvantaged
children, to care for the elderly, to provide nutrition and legal services
for the poor, and to strengthen the economic base of our urban communities
and, also, our rural areas.

This year, we will take our first steps to develop a national health plan.

We must never accept a permanent group of unemployed Americans, with no
hope and no stake in building our society. For those left out of the
economy because of discrimination, a lack of skills, or poverty, we must
maintain high levels of training, and we must continue to provide jobs.

A responsible budget is not our only weapon to control inflation. We must
act now to protect all Americans from health care costs that are rising $1
million per hour, 24 hours a day, doubling every 5 years. We must take
control of the largest contributor to that inflation: skyrocketing hospital
costs.

There will be no clearer test of the commitment of this Congress to the
anti-inflation fight than the legislation that I will submit again this
year to hold down inflation in hospital care.

Over the next 5 years, my proposals will save Americans a total of $60
billion, of which $25 billion will be savings to the American taxpayer in
the Federal budget itself. The American people have waited long enough.
This year we must act on hospital cost containment.

We must also fight inflation by improvements and better enforcement of our
antitrust laws and by reducing government obstacles to competition in the
private sector.

We must begin to scrutinize the overall effect of regulation in our
economy. Through deregulation of the airline industry we've increased
profits, cut prices for all Americans, and begun--for one of the few times
in the history of our Nation--to actually dismantle a major Federal
bureaucracy. This year, we must begin the effort to reform our regulatory
processes for the railroad, bus, and the trucking industries.

America has the greatest economic system in the world. Let's reduce
government interference and give it a chance to work.

I call on Congress to take other anti-inflation action--to expand our
exports to protect American jobs threatened by unfair trade, to conserve
energy, to increase production and to speed development of solar power, and
to reassess our Nation's technological superiority. American workers who
enlist in the fight against inflation deserve not just our gratitude, but
they deserve the protection of the real wage insurance proposal that I have
already made to the Congress.

To be successful, we must change our attitudes as well as our policies. We
cannot afford to live beyond our means. We cannot afford to create programs
that we can neither manage nor finance, or to waste our natural resources,
and we cannot tolerate mismanagement and fraud. Above all, we must meet the
challenges of inflation as a united people.

With the support of the American people, government in recent decades has
helped to dismantle racial barriers, has provided assistance for the
jobless and the retired, has fed the hungry, has protected the safety,
health, and bargaining rights of American workers, and has helped to
preserve our natural heritage.

But it's not enough to have created a lot of government programs. Now we
must make the good programs more effective and improve or weed out those
which are wasteful or unnecessary.

With the support of the Congress, we've begun to reorganize and to get
control of the bureaucracy. We are reforming the civil service system, so
that we can recognize and reward those who do a good job and correct or
remove those who do not.

This year, we must extend major reorganization efforts to education, to
economic development, and to the management of our natural resources. We
need to enact a sunshine (sunset) law that when government programs have
outlived their value, they will automatically be terminated.

There's no such thing as an effective and a noncontroversial reorganization
and reform. But we know that honest, effective government is essential to
restore public faith in our public action.

None of us can be satisfied when two-thirds of the American citizens chose
not to vote last year in a national election. Too many Americans feel
powerless against the influence of private lobbying groups and the
unbelievable flood of private campaign money which threatens our electoral
process.

This year, we must regain the public's faith by requiring limited financial
funds from public funds for congressional election campaigns. House bill 1
provides for this public financing of campaigns. And I look forward with a
great deal of anticipation to signing it at an early date.

A strong economy and an effective government will restore confidence in
America. But the path of the future must be charted in peace. We must
continue to build a new and a firm foundation for a stable world
community.

We are building that new foundation from a position of national
strength--the strength of our own defenses, the strength of our friendships
with other nations, and of our oldest American ideals.

America's military power is a major force for security and stability in the
world. We must maintain our strategic capability and continue the progress
of the last 2 years with our NATO Allies, with whom we have increased our
readiness, modernized our equipment, and strengthened our defense forces in
Europe. I urge you to support the strong defense budget which I have
proposed to the Congress.

But our national security in this complicated age requires more than just
military might. In less than a lifetime, world population has more than
doubled, colonial empires have disappeared, and a hundred new nations have
been born, and migration to the world's cities have all awakened new
yearnings for economic justice and human rights among people everywhere.

This demand for justice and human rights is a wave of the future. In such a
world, the choice is not which super power will dominate the world. None
can and none will. The choice instead is between a world of anarchy and
destruction, or a world of cooperation and peace.

In such a world, we seek not to stifle inevitable change, but to influence
its course in helpful and constructive ways that enhance our values, our
national interests, and the cause of peace.

Towering over this volatile, changing world, like a thundercloud on a
summer day, looms the awesome power of nuclear weapons.

We will continue to help shape the forces of change, to anticipate emerging
problems of nuclear proliferation and conventional arms sales, and to use
our great strength parts of the world before they erupt and spread.

We have no desire to be the world's policeman. But America does want to be
the world's peacemaker.

We are building the foundation for truly global cooperation, not only with
Western and industrialized nations but with the developing countries as
well. Our ties with Japan and our European allies are stronger than ever,
and so are our friendly relations with the people of Latin America, Africa,
and the Western Pacific and Asia.

We've won new respect in this hemisphere with the Panama Canal treaties.
We've gained new trust with the developing world through our opposition to
racism, our commitment to human rights, and our support for majority rule
in Africa.

The multilateral trade negotiations are now reaching a successful
conclusion, and congressional approval is essential to the economic
well-being of our own country and of the world. This will be one of our top
priorities in 1979.

We are entering a hopeful era in our relations with one-fourth of the
world's people who live in China. The presence of Vice Premier Deng
Xiaoping next week will help to inaugurate that new era. And with prompt
congressional action on authorizing legislation, we will continue our
commitment to a prosperous, peaceful, and secure life for the people of
Taiwan.

I'm grateful that in the past year, as in the year before, no American has
died in combat anywhere in the world. And in Iran, Nicaragua, Cyprus,
Namibia, and Rhodesia, our country is working for peaceful solutions to
dangerous conflicts.

In the Middle East, under the most difficult circumstances, we have sought
to help ancient enemies lay aside deep-seated differences that have
produced four bitter wars in our lifetime.

Our firm commitment to Israel's survival and security is rooted in our
deepest convictions and in our knowledge of the strategic importance to our
own Nation of a stable Middle East. To promote peace and reconciliation in
the region, we must retain the trust and the confidence both of Israel and
also of the Arab nations that are sincerely searching for peace.

I am determined, as President, to use the full, beneficial influence of our
country so that the precious opportunity for lasting peace between Israel
and Egypt will not be lost.

The new foundation of international cooperation that we seek excludes no
nation. Cooperation with the Soviet Union serves the cause of peace, for in
this nuclear age, world peace must include peace between the super
powers--and it must mean the control of nuclear arms.

Ten years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union made the historic
decision to open the strategic arms limitations talks, or SALT. The purpose
of SALT, then as now, is not to gain a unilateral advantage for either
nation, but to protect the security of both nations, to reverse the costly
and dangerous momentum of the nuclear arms race, to preserve a stable
balance of nuclear forces, and to demonstrate to a concerned world that we
are determined to help preserve the peace.

The first SALT agreement was concluded in 1972. And since then, during 6
years of negotiation by both Republican and Democratic leaders, nearly all
issues of SALT II have been resolved. If the Soviet Union continues to
negotiate in good faith, a responsible SALT agreement will be reached.

It's important that the American people understand the nature of the SALT
process.

SALT II is not based on sentiment; it's based on self-interest--of the
United States and of the Soviet Union. Both nations share a powerful common
interest in reducing the threat of a nuclear war. I will sign no agreement
which does not enhance our national security.

SALT II does not rely on trust; it will be verifiable. We have very
sophisticated, proven means, including our satellites, to determine for
ourselves whether or not the Soviet Union is meeting its treaty
obligations. I will sign no agreement which cannot be verified.

The American nuclear deterrent will remain strong after SALT II. For
example, just one of our relatively invulnerable Poseidon
submarines--comprising less than 2 percent of our total nuclear force of
submarines, aircraft, and land-based missiles--carries enough warheads to
destroy every large- and medium-sized city in the Soviet Union. Our
deterrent is overwhelming, and I will sign no agreement unless our deterrent
force will remain overwhelming.

A SALT agreement, of course, cannot substitute for wise diplomacy or a
strong defense, nor will it end the danger of nuclear war. But it will
certainly reduce that danger. It will strengthen our efforts to ban nuclear
tests and to stop the spread of atomic weapons to other nations. And it can
begin the process of negotiating new agreements which will further limit
nuclear arms.

The path of arms control, backed by a strong defense, the path our Nation
and every President has walked for 30 years, can lead to a world of law and
of international negotiation and consultation in which all peoples might
live in peace. In this year 1979, nothing is more important than that the
Congress and the people of the United States resolve to continue with me on
that path of nuclear arms control and world peace. This is paramount.

I've outlined some of the changes that have transformed the world and which
are continuing as we meet here tonight. But we in America need not fear
change. The values on which our Nation was founded: individual liberty,
self-determination, the potential for human fulfillment in freedom, all of
these endure. We find these democratic principles praised, even in books
smuggled out of totalitarian nations and on wallposters in lands which we
thought were closed to our influence. Our country has regained its special
place of leadership in the worldwide struggle for human rights. And that is
a commitment that we must keep at home, as well as abroad.

The civil rights revolution freed all Americans, black and white, but its
full promise still remains unrealized. I will continue to work with all my
strength for equal opportunity for all Americans--and for affirmative
action for those who carry the extra burden of past denial of equal
opportunity.

We remain committed to improving our labor laws to better protect the
rights of American workers. And our Nation must make it clear that the
legal rights of women as citizens are guaranteed under the laws of our land
by ratifying the equal rights amendment.

As long as I'm President, at home and around the world America's examples
and America's influence will be marshaled to advance the cause of human
rights.

To establish those values, two centuries ago a bold generation of Americans
risked their property, their position, and life itself. We are their heirs,
and they are sending us a message across the centuries. The words they made
so vivid are now growing faintly indistinct, because they are not heard
often enough. They are words like "justice," "equality," "unity," "truth,"
"sacrifice," "liberty," "faith," and "love."

These words remind us that the duty of our generation of Americans is to
renew our Nation's faith, not focused just against foreign threats but
against the threats of selfishness, cynicism, and apathy.

The new foundation I've discussed tonight can help us build a nation and a
world where every child is nurtured and can look to the future with hope,
where the resources now wasted on war can be turned towards meeting human
needs, where all people have enough to eat, a decent home, and protection
against disease.

It can help us build a nation and a world where all people are free to seek
the truth and to add to human understanding, so that all of us may live our
lives in peace.

Tonight, I ask you, the Members of the Congress, to join me in building
that new foundation, a better foundation, for our beloved country and our
world.

Thank you very much.
This last few months has not been an easy time for any of us. As we meet
tonight, it has never been more clear that the state of our Union depends
on the state of the world. And tonight, as throughout our own generation,
freedom and peace in the world depend on the state of our Union.

The 1980's have been born in turmoil, strife, and change. This is a time of
challenge to our interests and our values and it's a time that tests our
wisdom and our skills.

At this time in Iran, 50 Americans are still held captive, innocent victims
of terrorism and anarchy. Also at this moment, massive Soviet troops are
attempting to subjugate the fiercely independent and deeply religious
people of Afghanistan. These two acts--one of international terrorism and
one of military aggression--present a serious challenge to the United
States of America and indeed to all the nations of the world. Together, we
will meet these threats to peace.

I'm determined that the United States will remain the strongest of all
nations, but our power will never be used to initiate a threat to the
security of any nation or to the rights of any human being. We seek to be
and to remain secure--a nation at peace in a stable world. But to be secure
we must face the world as it is.

Three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges: the steady
growth and increased projection of Soviet military power beyond its own
borders; the overwhelming dependence of the Western democracies on oil
supplies from the Middle East; and the press of social and religious and
economic and political change in the many nations of the developing world,
exemplified by the revolution in Iran.

Each of these factors is important in its own right. Each interacts with
the others. All must be faced together, squarely and courageously. We will
face these challenges, and we will meet them with the best that is in us.
And we will not fail.

In response to the abhorrent act in Iran, our Nation has never been aroused
and unified so greatly in peacetime. Our position is clear. The United
States will not yield to blackmail.

We continue to pursue these specific goals: first, to protect the present
and long-range interests of the United States; secondly, to preserve the
lives of the American hostages and to secure, as quickly as possible, their
safe release, if possible, to avoid bloodshed which might further endanger
the lives of our fellow citizens; to enlist the help of other nations in
condemning this act of violence, which is shocking and violates the moral
and the legal standards of a civilized world; and also to convince and to
persuade the Iranian leaders that the real danger to their nation lies in
the north, in the Soviet Union and from the Soviet troops now in
Afghanistan, and that the unwarranted Iranian quarrel with the United
States hampers their response to this far greater danger to them.

If the American hostages are harmed, a severe price will be paid. We will
never rest until every one of the American hostages are released.

But now we face a broader and more fundamental challenge in this region
because of the recent military action of the Soviet Union.

Now, as during the last 3 1/2 decades, the relationship between our
country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most
critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be
engulfed in global conflict.

Since the end of the Second World War, America has led other nations in
meeting the challenge of mounting Soviet power. This has not been a simple
or a static relationship. Between us there has been cooperation, there has
been competition, and at times there has been confrontation.

In the 1940's we took the lead in creating the Atlantic Alliance in
response to the Soviet Union's suppression and then consolidation of its
East European empire and the resulting threat of the Warsaw Pact to Western
Europe.

In the 1950's we helped to contain further Soviet challenges in Korea and
in the Middle East, and we rearmed to assure the continuation of that
containment.

In the 1960's we met the Soviet challenges in Berlin, and we faced the
Cuban missile crisis. And we sought to engage the Soviet Union in the
important task of moving beyond the cold war and away from confrontation.

And in the 1970's three American Presidents negotiated with the Soviet
leaders in attempts to halt the growth of the nuclear arms race. We sought
to establish rules of behavior that would reduce the risks of conflict, and
we searched for areas of cooperation that could make our relations
reciprocal and productive, not only for the sake of our two nations but for
the security and peace of the entire world.

In all these actions, we have maintained two commitments: to be ready to
meet any challenge by Soviet military power, and to develop ways to resolve
disputes and to keep the peace.

Preventing nuclear war is the foremost responsibility of the two
superpowers. That's why we've negotiated the strategic arms limitation
treaties--SALT I and SALT II. Especially now, in a time of great tension,
observing the mutual constraints imposed by the terms of these treaties
will be in the best interest of both countries and will help to preserve
world peace. I will consult very closely with the Congress on this matter
as we strive to control nuclear weapons. That effort to control nuclear
weapons will not be abandoned.

We superpowers also have the responsibility to exercise restraint in the
use of our great military force. The integrity and the independence of
weaker nations must not be threatened. They must know that in our presence
they are secure.

But now the Soviet Union has taken a radical and an aggressive new step.
It's using its great military power against a relatively defenseless
nation. The implications of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan could pose
the most serious threat to the peace since the Second World War.

The vast majority of nations on Earth have condemned this latest Soviet
attempt to extend its colonial domination of others and have demanded the
immediate withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Moslem world is especially and
justifiably outraged by this aggression against an Islamic people. No
action of a world power has ever been so quickly and so overwhelmingly
condemned. But verbal condemnation is not enough. The Soviet Union must pay
a concrete price for their aggression.

While this invasion continues, we and the other nations of the world cannot
conduct business as usual with the Soviet Union. That's why the United
States has imposed stiff economic penalties on the Soviet Union. I will not
issue any permits for Soviet ships to fish in the coastal waters of the
United States. I've cut Soviet access to high-technology equipment and to
agricultural products. I've limited other commerce with the Soviet Union,
and I've asked our allies and friends to join with us in restraining their
own trade with the Soviets and not to replace our own embargoed items. And
I have notified the Olympic Committee that with Soviet invading forces in
Afghanistan, neither the American people nor I will support sending an
Olympic team to Moscow.

The Soviet Union is going to have to answer some basic questions: Will it
help promote a more stable international environment in which its own
legitimate, peaceful concerns can be pursued? Or will it continue to expand
its military power far beyond its genuine security needs, and use that
power for colonial conquest? The Soviet Union must realize that its
decision to use military force in Afghanistan will be costly to every
political and economic relationship it values.

The region which is now threatened by Soviet troops in Afghanistan is of
great strategic importance: It contains more than two-thirds of the world's
exportable oil. The Soviet effort to dominate Afghanistan has brought
Soviet military forces to within 300 miles of the Indian Ocean and close to
the Straits of Hormuz, a waterway through which most of the world's oil
must flow. The Soviet Union is now attempting to consolidate a strategic
position, therefore, that poses a grave threat to the free movement of
Middle East oil.

This situation demands careful thought, steady nerves, and resolute action,
not only for this year but for many years to come. It demands collective
efforts to meet this new threat to security in the Persian Gulf and in
Southwest Asia. It demands the participation of all those who rely on oil
from the Middle East and who are concerned with global peace and stability.
And it demands consultation and close cooperation with countries in the
area which might be threatened.

Meeting this challenge will take national will, diplomatic and political
wisdom, economic sacrifice, and, of course, military capability. We must
call on the best that is in us to preserve the security of this crucial
region.

Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside force to
gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on
the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault
will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.

During the past 3 years, you have joined with me to improve our own
security and the prospects for peace, not only in the vital oil-producing
area of the Persian Gulf region but around the world. We've increased
annually our real commitment for defense, and we will sustain this increase
of effort throughout the Five Year Defense Program. It's imperative that
Congress approve this strong defense budget for 1981, encompassing a
5-percent real growth in authorizations, without any reduction.

We are also improving our capability to deploy U.S. military forces rapidly
to distant areas. We've helped to strengthen NATO and our other alliances,
and recently we and other NATO members have decided to develop and to
deploy modernized, intermediate-range nuclear forces to meet an unwarranted
and increased threat from the nuclear weapons of the Soviet Union.

We are working with our allies to prevent conflict in the Middle East. The
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel is a notable achievement which
represents a strategic asset for America and which also enhances prospects
for regional and world peace. We are now engaged in further negotiations to
provide full autonomy for the people of the West Bank and Gaza, to resolve
the Palestinian issue in all its aspects, and to preserve the peace and
security of Israel. Let no one doubt our commitment to the security of
Israel. In a few days we will observe an historic event when Israel makes
another major withdrawal from the Sinai and when Ambassadors will be
exchanged between Israel and Egypt.

We've also expanded our own sphere of friendship. Our deep commitment to
human rights and to meeting human needs has improved our relationship with
much of the Third World. Our decision to normalize relations with the
People's Republic of China will help to preserve peace and stability in
Asia and in the Western Pacific.

We've increased and strengthened our naval presence in the Indian Ocean,
and we are now making arrangements for key naval and air facilities to be
used by our forces in the region of northeast Africa and the Persian Gulf.

We've reconfirmed our 1959 agreement to help Pakistan preserve its
independence and its integrity. The United States will take action
consistent with our own laws to assist Pakistan in resisting any outside
aggression. And I'm asking the Congress specifically to reaffirm this
agreement. I'm also working, along with the leaders of other nations, to
provide additional military and economic aid for Pakistan. That request
will come to you in just a few days.

Finally, we are prepared to work with other countries in the region to
share a cooperative security framework that respects differing values and
political beliefs, yet which enhances the independence, security, and
prosperity of all.

All these efforts combined emphasize our dedication to defend and preserve
the vital interests of the region and of the nation which we represent and
those of our allies--in Europe and the Pacific, and also in the parts of
the world which have such great strategic importance to us, stretching
especially through the Middle East and Southwest Asia. With your help, I
will pursue these efforts with vigor and with determination. You and I will
act as necessary to protect and to preserve our Nation's security.

The men and women of America's Armed Forces are on duty tonight in many
parts of the world. I'm proud of the job they are doing, and I know you
share that pride. I believe that our volunteer forces are adequate for
current defense needs, and I hope that it will not become necessary to
impose a draft. However, we must be prepared for that possibility. For this
reason, I have determined that the Selective Service System must now be
revitalized. I will send legislation and budget proposals to the Congress
next month so that we can begin registration and then meet future
mobilization needs rapidly if they arise.

We also need clear and quick passage of a new charter to define the legal
authority and accountability of our intelligence agencies. We will
guarantee that abuses do not recur, but we must tighten our controls on
sensitive intelligence information, and we need to remove unwarranted
restraints on America's ability to collect intelligence.

The decade ahead will be a time of rapid change, as nations everywhere seek
to deal with new problems and age-old tensions. But America need have no
fear. We can thrive in a world of change if we remain true to our values
and actively engaged in promoting world peace. We will continue to work as
we have for peace in the Middle East and southern Africa. We will continue
to build our ties with developing nations, respecting and helping to
strengthen their national independence which they have struggled so hard to
achieve. And we will continue to support the growth of democracy and the
protection of human rights.

In repressive regimes, popular frustrations often have no outlet except
through violence. But when peoples and their governments can approach their
problems together through open, democratic methods, the basis for stability
and peace is far more solid and far more enduring. That is why our support
for human rights in other countries is in our own national interest as well
as part of our own national character.

Peace--a peace that preserves freedom--remains America's first goal. In the
coming years, as a mighty nation we will continue to pursue peace. But to
be strong abroad we must be strong at home. And in order to be strong, we
must continue to face up to the difficult issues that confront us as a
nation today.

The crises in Iran and Afghanistan have dramatized a very important lesson:
Our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a clear and present danger to
our Nation's security. The need has never been more urgent. At long last,
we must have a clear, comprehensive energy policy for the United States.

As you well know, I have been working with the Congress in a concentrated
and persistent way over the past 3 years to meet this need. We have made
progress together. But Congress must act promptly now to complete final
action on this vital energy legislation. Our Nation will then have a major
conservation effort, important initiatives to develop solar power,
realistic pricing based on the true value of oil, strong incentives for the
production of coal and other fossil fuels in the United States, and our
Nation's most massive peacetime investment in the development of synthetic
fuels.

The American people are making progress in energy conservation. Last year
we reduced overall petroleum consumption by 8 percent and gasoline
consumption by 5 percent below what it was the year before. Now we must do
more.

After consultation with the Governors, we will set gasoline conservation
goals for each of the 50 States, and I will make them mandatory if these
goals are not met.

I've established an import ceiling for 1980 of 8.2 million barrels a
day--well below the level of foreign oil purchases in 1977. I expect our
imports to be much lower than this, but the ceiling will be enforced by an
oil import fee if necessary. I'm prepared to lower these imports still
further if the other oil-consuming countries will join us in a fair and
mutual reduction. If we have a serious shortage, I will not hesitate to
impose mandatory gasoline rationing immediately.

The single biggest factor in the inflation rate last year, the increase in
the inflation rate last year, was from one cause: the skyrocketing prices
of OPEC oil. We must take whatever actions are necessary to reduce our
dependence on foreign oil--and at the same time reduce inflation.

As individuals and as families, few of us can produce energy by ourselves.
But all of us can conserve energy--every one of us, every day of our lives.
Tonight I call on you--in fact, all the people of America--to help our
Nation. Conserve energy. Eliminate waste. Make 1980 indeed a year of energy
conservation.

Of course, we must take other actions to strengthen our Nation's economy.

First, we will continue to reduce the deficit and then to balance the
Federal budget.

Second, as we continue to work with business to hold down prices, we'll
build also on the historic national accord with organized labor to restrain
pay increases in a fair fight against inflation.

Third, we will continue our successful efforts to cut paperwork and to
dismantle unnecessary Government regulation.

Fourth, we will continue our progress in providing jobs for America,
concentrating on a major new program to provide training and work for our
young people, especially minority youth. It has been said that "a mind is a
terrible thing to waste." We will give our young people new hope for jobs
and a better life in the 1980's.

And fifth, we must use the decade of the 1980's to attack the basic
structural weaknesses and problems in our economy through measures to
increase productivity, savings, and investment.

With these energy and economic policies, we will make America even stronger
at home in this decade--just as our foreign and defense policies will make
us stronger and safer throughout the world. We will never abandon our
struggle for a just and a decent society here at home. That's the heart of
America--and it's the source of our ability to inspire other people to
defend their own rights abroad.

Our material resources, great as they are, are limited. Our problems are
too complex for simple slogans or for quick solutions. We cannot solve them
without effort and sacrifice. Walter Lippmann once reminded us, "You took
the good things for granted. Now you must earn them again. For every right
that you cherish, you have a duty which you must fulfill. For every good
which you wish to preserve, you will have to sacrifice your comfort and
your ease. There is nothing for nothing any longer."

Our challenges are formidable. But there's a new spirit of unity and
resolve in our country. We move into the 1980's with confidence and hope
and a bright vision of the America we want: an America strong and free, an
America at peace, an America with equal rights for all citizens--and for
women, guaranteed in the United States Constitution--an America with jobs
and good health and good education for every citizen, an America with a
clean and bountiful life in our cities and on our farms, an America that
helps to feed the world, an America secure in filling its own energy needs,
an America of justice, tolerance, and compassion. For this vision to come
true, we must sacrifice, but this national commitment will be an exciting
enterprise that will unify our people.

Together as one people, let us work to build our strength at home, and
together as one indivisible union, let us seek peace and security
throughout the world.

Together let us make of this time of challenge and danger a decade of
national resolve and of brave achievement.

Thank you very much.
To the Congress of the United States:

The State of the Union is sound. Our economy is recovering from a
recession. A national energy plan is in place and our dependence on foreign
oil is decreasing. We have been at peace for four uninterrupted years.

But, our Nation has serious problems. Inflation and unemployment are
unacceptably high. The world oil market is increasingly tight. There are
trouble spots throughout the world, and 52 American hostages are being held
in Iran against international law and against every precept of human
affairs.

However, I firmly believe that, as a result of the progress made in so many
domestic and international areas over the past four years, our Nation is
stronger, wealthier, more compassionate and freer than it was four years
ago. I am proud of that fact. And I believe the Congress should be proud as
well, for so much of what has been accomplished over the past four years
has been due to the hard work, insights and cooperation of Congress. I
applaud the Congress for its efforts and its achievements.

In this State of the Union Message I want to recount the achievements and
progress of the last four years and to offer recommendations to the
Congress for this year. While my term as President will end before the 97th
Congress begins its work in earnest, I hope that my recommendations will
serve as a guide for the direction this country should take so we build on
the record of the past four years.

RECORD OF PROGRESS

When I took office, our Nation faced a number of serious domestic and
international problems:

--no national energy policy existed, and our dependence on foreign oil was
rapidly increasing;

--public trust in the integrity and openness of the government was low;

--the Federal government was operating inefficiently in administering
essential programs and policies;

--major social problems were being ignored or poorly addressed by the
Federal government;

--our defense posture was declining as a result of a defense budget which
was continuously shrinking in real terms;

--the strength of the NATO Alliance needed to be bolstered;

--tensions between Israel and Egypt threatened another Middle East war;
and

--America's resolve to oppose human rights violations was under serious
question.

Over the past 48 months, clear progress has been made in solving the
challenges we found in January of 1977:

--almost all of our comprehensive energy program have been enacted, and the
Department of Energy has been established to administer the program;
confidence in the government's integrity has been restored, and respect for
the government's openness and fairness has been renewed;

--the government has been made more effective and efficient: the Civil
Service system was completely reformed for the first time this century;

--14 reorganization initiatives have been proposed to the Congress,
approved, and implemented;

--two new Cabinet departments have been created to consolidate and
streamline the government's handling of energy and education problems;

--inspectors general have been placed in each Cabinet department to combat
fraud, waste and other abuses;

--the regulatory process has been reformed through creation of the
Regulatory Council, implementation of Executive Order 12044 and its
requirement for cost-impact analyses, elimination of unnecessary
regulation, and passage of the Regulatory Flexibility Act;

--procedures have been established to assure citizen participation in
government;

--and the airline, trucking, rail and communications industries are being
deregulated;

--critical social problems, many long ignored by the Federal government,
have been addressed directly;

--an urban policy was developed and implemented to reverse the decline
in our urban areas;

--the Social Security System was refinanced to put it on a sound financial
basis;

--the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act was enacted;

--Federal assistance for education was expanded by more than 75 percent;

--the minimum wage was increased to levels needed to ease the effects of
inflation;

--affirmative action has been pursued aggressively; more blacks, Hispanics
and women have been appointed to senior government positions and to
judgeships than at any other time in our history;

--the ERA ratification deadline was extended to aid the ratification effort;

--and minority business procurement by the Federal government has more than
doubled;

--the Nation's first sectoral policies were put in place, for the auto and
steel industries, with my Administration demonstrating the value of
cooperation between the government, business and labor;

--reversing previous trends, real defense spending has increased every year
since 1977;

--the real increase in FY 1980 defense spending is well above 3 percent
and I expect FY 1981 defense spending to be even higher;

--looking ahead, the defense program I am proposing is premised on a real
increase in defense spending over the next five years of 20 percent or
more;

--the NATO Alliance has proven its unity in responding to the situations in
Eastern Europe and Southwest Asia and in agreeing on the issues to be
addressed in the review of the Helsinki Final Act currently underway in
Madrid;

--the peace process in the Middle East established at Camp David and by the
Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel is being buttressed on two fronts:
steady progress in the normalization of Egyptian-Israeli relations in many
fields, and the commitment of both Egypt and Israel, with United States'
assistance, to see through to successful conclusion the autonomy
negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza;

--the Panama Canal Treaties have been put into effect, which has helped to
improve relations with Latin America;

--we have continued this Nation's strong commitment to the pursuit of human
rights throughout the world, evenhandedly and objectively;

--our commitment to a worldwide human rights policy has remained firm;

--and many other countries have given high priority to it;

--our resolve to oppose aggression, such as the illegal invasion of the
Soviet Union into Afghanistan, has been supported by tough action.

I. ENSURING ECONOMIC STRENGTH ECONOMY

During the last decade our Nation has withstood a series of economic shocks
unprecedented in peacetime. The most dramatic of these has been the
explosive increases of OPEC oil prices. But we have also faced world
commodity shortages, natural disasters, agricultural shortages and major
challenges to world peace and security. Our ability to deal with these
shocks has been impaired because of a decrease in the growth of
productivity and the persistence of underlying inflationary forces built up
over the past 15 years.

Nevertheless, the economy has proved to be remarkably resilient. Real
output has grown at an average rate of 3 percent per year since I took
office, and employment has grown by 10 percent. We have added about 8
million productive private sector jobs to the economy. However,
unacceptably high inflation--the most difficult economic problem I have
faced--persists.

This inflation--which threatens the growth, productivity, and stability of
our economy--requires that we restrain the growth of the budget to the
maximum extent consistent with national security and human compassion. I
have done so in my earlier budgets, and in my FY '82 budget. However, while
restraint is essential to any appropriate economic policy, high inflation
cannot be attributed solely to government spending. The growth in budget
outlays has been more the result of economic factors than the cause of
them.

We are now in the early stages of economic recovery following a short
recession. Typically, a post-recessionary period has been marked by
vigorous economic growth aided by anti-recessionary policy measures such as
large tax cuts or big, stimulation spending programs. I have declined to
recommend such actions to stimulate economic activity, because the
persistent inflationary pressures that beset our economy today dictate a
restrained fiscal policy.

Accordingly, I am asking the Congress to postpone until January 1, 1982,
the personal tax reductions I had earlier proposed to take effect on
January 1 of this year.

However, my 1982 budget proposes significant tax changes to increase the
sources of financing for business investment. While emphasizing the need
for continued fiscal restraint, this budget takes the first major step in a
long-term tax reduction program designed to increase capital formation. The
failure of our Nation's capital stock to grow at a rate that keeps pace
with its labor force has clearly been one cause of our productivity
slowdown. Higher investment rates are also critically needed to meet our
Nation's energy needs, and to replace energy-inefficient plants and
equipment with new energy-saving physical plants. The level of investment
that is called for will not occur in the absence of policies to encourage
it.

Therefore, my budget proposes a major liberalization of tax allowances for
depreciation, as well as simplified depreciation accounting, increasing the
allowable rates by about 40 percent. I am also proposing improvements in
the investment tax credit, making it refundable, to meet the investment
needs of firms with no current earnings.

These two proposals, along with carefully-phased tax reductions for
individuals, will improve both economic efficiency and tax equity. I urge
the Congress to enact legislation along the lines and timetable I have
proposed.

THE 1982 BUDGET

The FY 1982 budget I have sent to the Congress continues our four-year
policy of prudence and restraint. While the budget deficits during my term
are higher than I would have liked, their size is determined for the most
part by economic conditions. And in spite of these conditions, the relative
size of the deficit continues to decline. In 1976, before I took office,
the budget deficit equalled 4 percent of gross national product. It had
been cut to 2.3 percent in the 1980 fiscal year just ended. My 1982 budget
contains a deficit estimated to be less than 1 percent of our gross
national product.

The rate of growth in Federal spending has been held to a minimum.
Nevertheless, outlays are still rising more rapidly than many had
anticipated, the result of many powerful forces in our society:

We face a threat to our security, as events in Afghanistan, the Middle
East, and Eastern Europe make clear. We have a steadily aging population
and, as a result, the biggest single increase in the Federal budget is the
rising cost of retirement programs, particularly social security. We face
other important domestic needs: to continue responsibility for the
disadvantaged; to provide the capital needed by our cities and our
transportation systems; to protect our environment; to revitalize American
industry; and to increase the export of American goods and services so
essential to the creation of jobs and a trade surplus.

Yet the Federal Government itself may not always be the proper source of
such assistance. For example, it must not usurp functions if they can be
more appropriately decided upon, managed, and financed by the private
sector or by State and local governments. My Administration has always
sought to consider the proper focus of responsibility for the most
efficient resolution of problems.

We have also recognized the need to simplify the system of grants to State
and local governments. I have again proposed several grant consolidations
in the 1982 budget, including a new proposal that would consolidate several
highway programs.

The pressures for growth in Federal use of national resources are great. My
Administration has initiated many new approaches to cope with these
pressures. We started a multi-year budget system, and we began a system for
controlling Federal credit programs. Yet in spite of increasing needs to
limit spending growth, we have consistently adhered to these strong budget
principles:

Our Nation's armed forces must always stand sufficiently strong to deter
aggression and to assure our security. An effective national energy plan is
essential to increase domestic production of oil and gas, to encourage
conservation of our scarce energy resources, to stimulate conversion to
more abundant fuels, and to reduce our trade deficit. The essential human
needs for our citizens must be given the highest priority. The Federal
Government must lead the way in investment in the Nation's technological
future. The Federal Government has an obligation to nurture and protect our
environment--the common resource, birthright, and sustenance of the
American people.

My 1982 budget continues to support these principles. It also proposes
responsible tax reductions to encourage a more productive economy, and
adequate funding of our highest priority programs within an overall policy
of constraint.

Fiscal restraint must be continued in the years ahead. Budgets must be
tight enough to convince those who set wages and prices that the Federal
Government is serious about fighting inflation but not so tight as to choke
off all growth.

Careful budget policy should be supplemented by other measures designed to
reduce inflation at lower cost in lost output and employment. These other
steps include measures to increase investment--such as the tax proposals
included in my 1982 budget--and measures to increase competition and
productivity in our economy. Voluntary incomes policies can also directly
influence wages and prices in the direction of moderation and thereby bring
inflation down faster and at lower cost to the economy. Through a tax-based
incomes policy (TIP) we could provide tax incentives for firms and workers
to moderate their wage and price increases. In the coming years, control of
Federal expenditures can make possible periodic tax reductions. The
Congress should therefore begin now to evaluate the potentialities of a TIP
program so that when the next round of tax reductions is appropriate a TIP
program will be seriously considered.

EMPLOYMENT

During the last four years we have given top priority to meeting the needs
of workers and providing additional job opportunities to those who seek
work. Since the end of 1976:

Almost 9 million new jobs have been added to the nation's economy total
employment has reached 97 million. More jobs than ever before are held by
women, minorities and young people. Employment over the past four years has
increased by: 17% for adult women 11% for blacks, and 30% for Hispanics
employment of black teenagers increased by more than 5%, reversing the
decline that occurred in the previous eight years.

Major initiatives launched by this Administration helped bring about these
accomplishments and have provided a solid foundation for employment and
training policy in the 1980's. In 1977, as part of the comprehensive
economic stimulus program:

425,000 public service jobs were created A $1 billion youth employment
initiative funded 200,000 jobs the doubling of the Job Corps to 44,000
slots began and 1 million summer youth jobs were approved--a 25 percent
increase.

In 1978:

The Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act became law the $400 million
Private Sector Initiatives Program was begun a targeted jobs tax credit for
disadvantaged youth and others with special employment barriers was enacted
the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act was reauthorized for four
years.

In 1979:

A $6 billion welfare reform proposal was introduced with funding for
400,000 public service jobs welfare reform demonstration projects were
launched in communities around the country the Vice President initiated a
nationwide review of youth unemployment in this country.

In 1980:

The findings of the Vice President's Task Force revealed the major
education and employment deficits that exist for poor and minority
youngsters. As a result a $2 billion youth education and jobs initiative
was introduced to provide unemployed youth with the basic education and
work experience they need to compete in the labor market of the 1980's. As
part of the economic revitalization program several steps were proposed to
aid workers in high unemployment communities:

An additional 13 weeks of unemployment benefits for the long term
unemployed. $600 million to train the disadvantaged and unemployed for new
private sector jobs. Positive adjustment demonstrations to aid workers in
declining industries. The important Title VII Private Sector Initiatives
Program was reauthorized for an additional two years.

In addition to making significant progress in helping the disadvantaged and
unemployed, important gains were realized for all workers:

An historic national accord with organized labor made it possible for the
views of working men and women to be heard as the nation's economic and
domestic policies were formulated; the Mine Safety and Health Act brought
about improved working conditions for the nation's 500,000 miners.
substantial reforms of Occupational Safety and Health Administration were
accomplished to help reduce unnecessary burdens on business and to focus on
major health and safety problems; the minimum wage was increased over a
four year period from $2.30 to $3.35 an hour; the Black Lung Benefit Reform
Act was signed into law; attempts to weaken Davis-Bacon Act were defeated.

While substantial gains have been made in the last four years, continued
efforts are required to ensure that this progress is continued:

Government must continue to make labor a full partner in the policy
decisions that affect the interests of working men and women; a broad,
bipartisan effort to combat youth unemployment must be sustained
compassionate reform of the nation's welfare system should be continued
with employment opportunities provided for those able to work; workers in
declining industries should be provided new skills and help in finding
employment.

TRADE

Over the past year, the U.S. trade picture improved as a result of solid
export gains in both manufactured and agricultural products. Agricultural
exports reached a new record of over $40 billion, while manufactured
exports have grown by 24 percent to a record $144 billion. In these areas
the United States recorded significant surpluses of $24 billion and $19
billion respectively. While our oil imports remained a major drain on our
foreign exchange earnings, that drain was somewhat moderated by a 19
percent decline in the volume of oil imports.

U.S. trade negotiators made significant progress over the past year in
assuring effective implementation of the agreements negotiated during the
Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations. Agreements reached with the
Japanese government, for example, will assure that the United States will
be able to expand its exports to the Japanese market in such key areas as
telecommunications equipment, tobacco, and lumber. Efforts by U.S. trade
negotiators also helped to persuade a number of key developing countries to
accept many of the non-tariff codes negotiated during the Multilateral
Trade Negotiations. This will assure that these countries will increasingly
assume obligations under the international trading system.

A difficult world economic environment posed a challenge for the management
of trade relations. U.S. trade negotiators were called upon to manage
serious sectoral problems in such areas as steel, and helped to assure that
U.S. chemical exports will have continued access to the European market.

Close consultations with the private sector in the United States have
enabled U.S. trade negotiators to pinpoint obstacles to U.S. trade in
services, and to build a basis for future negotiations. Services have been
an increasingly important source of export earnings for the United States,
and the United States must assure continued and increased access to foreign
markets.

The trade position of the United States has improved. But vigorous efforts
are needed in a number of areas to assure continued market access for U.S.
exports, particularly agricultural and high technology products, in which
the United States continues to have a strong competitive edge. Continued
efforts are also needed to remove many domestic disincentives, which now
hamper U.S. export growth. And we must ensure that countries do not
manipulate investment, or impose investment performance requirements which
distort trade and cost us jobs in this country.

In short, we must continue to seek free--but fair--trade. That is the
policy my Administration has pursued from the beginning, even in areas
where foreign competition has clearly affected our domestic industry. In
the steel industry, for instance, we have put Trigger Price Mechanism into
place to help prevent the dumping of steel. That action has strengthened
the domestic steel industry. In the automobile industry, we have worked--
without resort to import quotas--to strengthen the industry's ability to
modernize and compete effectively.

SMALL BUSINESS

I have often said that there is nothing small about small business in
America. These firms account for nearly one-half our gross national
product; over half of new technology; and much more than half of the jobs
created by industry.

Because this sector of the economy is the very lifeblood of our National
economy, we have done much together to improve the competitive climate for
smaller firms. These concerted efforts have been an integral part of my
program to revitalize the economy.

They include my campaign to shrink substantially the cash and time
consuming red tape burden imposed on business. They include my
personally-directed policy of ambitiously increasing the Federal
contracting dollars going to small firms, especially those owned by women
and minorities. And they include my proposals to reinvigorate existing
small businesses and assist the creation of new ones through tax reform;
financing assistance; market expansion; and support of product innovation.

Many of my initiatives to facilitate the creation and growth of small
businesses were made in response to the White House Conference on Small
Business, which I convened. My Administration began the implementation of
most of the ideas produced last year by that citizen's advisory body;
others need to be addressed. I have proposed the reconvening of the
Conference next year to review progress; reassess priorities; and set new
goals. In the interim I hope that the incoming Administration and the new
Congress will work with the committee I have established to keep these
business development ideas alive and help implement Conference
recommendations.

MINORITY BUSINESS

One of the most successful developments of my Administration has been the
growth and strengthening of minority business. This is the first
Administration to put the issue on the policy agenda as a matter of major
importance. To implement the results of our early efforts in this field I
submitted legislation to Congress designed to further the development of
minority business.

We have reorganized the Office of Minority Business into the Minority
Business Development Administration in the Department of Commerce. MBDA has
already proven to be a major factor in assisting minority businesses to
achieve equitable competitive positions in the marketplace.

The Federal government's procurement from minority-owned firms has nearly
tripled since I took office. Federal deposits in minority-owned banks have
more than doubled and minority ownership of radio and television stations
has nearly doubled. The SBA administered 8(a) Pilot Program for procurement
with the Army proved to be successful and I recently expanded the number of
agencies involved to include NASA and the Departments of Energy and
Transportation.

I firmly believe the critical path to full freedom and equality for
America's minorities rests with the ability of minority communities to
participate competitively in the free enterprise system. I believe the
government has a fundamental responsibility to assist in the development of
minority business and I hope the progress made in the last four years will
continue.

II. CREATING ENERGY SECURITY

Since I took office, my highest legislative priorities have involved the
reorientation and redirection of U.S. energy activities and for the first
time, to establish a coordinated national energy policy. The struggle to
achieve that policy has been long and difficult, but the accomplishments of
the past four years make clear that our country is finally serious about
the problems caused by our overdependence on foreign oil. Our progress
should not be lost. We must rely on and encourage multiple forms of energy
production--coal, crude oil, natural gas, solar, nuclear, synthetics--and
energy conservation. The framework put in place over the last four years
will enable us to do this.

NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY

As a result of actions my Administration and the Congress have taken over
the past four years, our country finally has a national energy policy:

Under my program of phased decontrol, domestic crude oil price controls
will end September 30, 1981. As a result exploratory drilling activities
have reached an all-time high; Prices for new natural gas are being
decontrolled under the Natural Gas Policy Act--and natural gas production
is now at an all time high; the supply shortages of several years ago have
been eliminated; The windfall profits tax on crude oil has been enacted
providing $227 billion over ten years for assistance to low-income
households, increased mass transit funding, and a massive investment in the
production and development of alternative energy sources; The Synthetic
Fuels Corporation has been established to help private companies build the
facilities to produce energy from synthetic fuels; Solar energy funding has
been quadrupled, solar energy tax credits enacted, and a Solar Energy and
Energy Conservation Bank has been established; A route has been chosen to
bring natural gas from the North Slope of Alaska to the lower 48 states;
Coal production and consumption incentives have been increased, and coal
production is now at its highest level in history; A gasoline rationing
plan has been approved by Congress for possible use in the event of a
severe energy supply shortage or interruption; Gasohol production has been
dramatically increased, with a program being put in place to produce 500
million gallons of alcohol fuel by the end of this year--an amount that
could enable gasohol to meet the demand for 10 percent of all unleaded
gasoline; New energy conservation incentives have been provided for
individuals, businesses and communities and conservation has increased
dramatically. The U.S. has reduced oil imports by 25 percent--or 2 million
barrels per day--over the past four years.

INCREASED DEVELOPMENT OF DOMESTIC ENERGY SOURCES

Although it is essential that the Nation reduce its dependence on imported
fossil fuels and complete the transition to reliance on domestic renewable
sources of energy, it is also important that this transition be
accomplished in an orderly, economic, and environmentally sound manner. To
this end, the Administration has launched several initiatives.

Leasing of oil and natural gas on federal lands, particularly the outer
continental shelf, has been accelerated at the same time as the
Administration has reformed leasing procedures through the 1978 amendments
to the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act. In 1979 the Interior Department
held six OCS lease sales, the greatest number ever, which resulted in
federal receipts of $6.5 billion, another record. The five-year OCS Leasing
schedule was completed, requiring 36 sales over the next five years.

Since 1971 no general federal coal lease sales were suspended. Over the
past four years the Administration has completely revised the federal coal
leasing program to bring it into compliance with the requirements of 1976
Federal Land Planning and Management Act and other statutory provisions.
The program is designed to balance the competing interests that affect
resource development on public lands and to ensure that adequate supplies
of coal will be available to meet national needs. As a result, the first
general competitive federal coal lease sale in ten years will be held this
month.

In July 1980, I signed into law the Energy Security Act of 1980 which
established the Synthetic Fuels Corporation. The Corporation is designed to
spur the development of commercial technologies for production of synthetic
fuels, such as liquid and gaseous fuels from coal and the production of oil
from oil shale. The Act provides the Corporation with an initial $22
billion to accomplish these objectives. The principal purpose of the
legislation is to ensure that the nation will have available in the late
1980's the option to undertake commercial development of synthetic fuels if
that becomes necessary. The Energy Security Act also provides significant
incentives for the development of gasohol and biomass fuels, thereby
enhancing the nation's supply of alternative energy sources.

COMMITMENT TO A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY FUTURE

The Administration's 1977 National Energy Plan marked an historic departure
from the policies of previous Administrations. The plan stressed the
importance of both energy production and conservation to achieving our
ultimate national goal of relying primarily on secure sources of energy.
The National Energy Plan made energy conservation a cornerstone of our
national energy policy.

In 1978, I initiated the Administration's Solar Domestic Policy Review.
This represented the first step towards widespread introduction of
renewable energy sources into the Nation's economy. As a result of the
Review, I issued the 1979 Solar Message to Congress, the first such message
in the Nation's history. The Message outlined the Administration's solar
program and established an ambitious national goal for the year 2000 of
obtaining 20 percent of this Nation's energy from solar and renewable
sources. The thrust of the federal solar program is to help industry
develop solar energy sources by emphasizing basic research and development
of solar technologies which are not currently economic, such as
photovoltaics, which generate energy directly from the sun. At the same
time, through tax incentives, education, and the Solar Energy and Energy
Conservation Bank, the solar program seeks to encourage state and local
governments, industry, and our citizens to expand their use of solar and
renewable resource technologies currently available.

As a result of these policies and programs, the energy efficiency of the
American economy has improved markedly and investments in renewable energy
sources have grown significantly. It now takes 3 1/2 percent less energy to
produce a constant dollar of GNP than it did in January 1977. This increase
in efficiency represents a savings of over 1.3 million barrels per day of
oil equivalent, about the level of total oil production now occurring in
Alaska. Over the same period, Federal support for conservation and solar
energy has increased by more than 3000 percent, to $3.3 billion in FY 1981,
including the tax credits for solar energy and energy conservation
investments--these credits are expected to amount to $1.2 billion in FY
1981 and $1.5 billion in FY 1982.

COMMITMENT TO NUCLEAR SAFETY AND SECURITY

Since January 1977, significant progress has been achieved in resolving
three critical problems resulting from the use of nuclear energy:
radioactive waste management, nuclear safety and weapons proliferation.

In 1977, the Administration announced its nuclear nonproliferation policy
and initiated the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation. In 1978, Congress
passed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Act, an historic piece of legislation.

In February 1980, the Administration transmitted its nuclear waste
management policy to the Congress. This policy was a major advance over all
previous efforts. The principal aspects of that policy are: acknowledging
the seriousness of the problem and the numerous technical and institutional
issues; adopting a technically and environmentally conservative approach to
the first permanent repository; and providing the states with significant
involvement in nuclear waste disposal decisions by creating the State
Planning Council. While much of the plan can be and is being implemented
administratively, some new authorities are needed. The Congress should give
early priority to enacting provisions for away-from-reactor storage and the
State Planning Council.

The accident at Three Mile Island made the nation acutely aware of the
safety risks posed by nuclear power plants. In response, the President
established the Kemeny Commission to review the accident and make
recommendations. Virtually all of the Commission's substantive
recommendations were adopted by the Administration and are now being
implemented by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The Congress adopted the
President's proposed plan for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the
Nuclear Safety Oversight Committee was established to ensure that the
Administration's decisions were implemented.

Nuclear safety will remain a vital concern in the years ahead. We must
continue to press ahead for the safe, secure disposal of radioactive
wastes, and prevention of nuclear proliferation.

While significant growth in foreign demand for U.S. steam coal is foreseen,
congestion must be removed at major U.S. coal exporting ports such as
Hampton Roads, Virginia, and Baltimore, Maryland. My Administration has
worked through the Interagency Coal Task Force Study to promote cooperation
and coordination of resources between shippers, railroads, vessel broker/
operators and port operators, and to determine the most appropriate Federal
role in expanding and modernizing coal export facilities, including
dredging deeper channels at selected ports. As a result of the Task Force's
efforts, administrative steps have been taken by the Corps of Engineers to
reduce significantly the amount of time required for planning and economic
review of port dredging proposals. The Administration has also recommended
that the Congress enact legislation to give the President generic authority
to recommend appropriations for channel dredging activities. Private
industry will, of course, play the major role in developing the United
States' coal export facilities, but the government must continue to work to
facilitate transportation to foreign markets.

III. ENHANCING BASIC HUMAN AND SOCIAL NEEDS

For too long prior to my Administration, many of our Nation's basic human
and social needs were being ignored or handled insensitively by the Federal
government. Over the last four years, we have significantly increased
funding for many of the vital programs in these areas; developed new
programs where needs were unaddressed; targeted Federal support to those
individuals and areas most in need of our assistance; and removed barriers
that have unnecessarily kept many disadvantaged citizens from obtaining aid
for their most basic needs.

Our record has produced clear progress in the effort to solve some of the
country's fundamental human and social problems. My Administration and the
Congress, working together, have demonstrated that government must and can
meet our citizens' basic human and social needs in a responsible and
compassionate way.

But there is an unfinished agenda still before the Congress. If we are to
meet our obligations to help all Americans realize the dreams of sound
health care, decent housing, effective social services, a good education,
and a meaningful job, important legislation still must be enacted. National
Health Insurance, Welfare Reform, Child Health Assessment Program, are
before the Congress and I urge their passage.

HEALTH NATIONAL HEALTH PLAN

During my Administration, I proposed to Congress a National Health Plan
which will enable the country to reach the goal of comprehensive, universal
health care coverage. The legislation I submitted lays the foundation for
this comprehensive plan and addresses the most serious problems of health
financing and delivery. It is realistic and enactable. It does not
overpromise or overspend, and, as a result, can be the solution to the
thirty years of Congressional battles on national health insurance. My Plan
includes the following key features:

Nearly 15 million additional poor would receive fully-subsidized
comprehensive coverage; pre-natal and delivery services are provided for
all pregnant women and coverage is provided for all acute care for infants
in their first year of life; the elderly and disabled would have a limit of
$1,250 placed on annual out-of-pocket medical expenses and would no longer
face limits on hospital coverage; all full-time employees and their
families would receive insurance against at least major medical expenses
under mandated employer coverage; Medicare and Medicaid would be combined
and expanded into an umbrella Federal program, Healthcare, for increased
program efficiency, accountability and uniformity; and strong cost
controls and health system reforms would be implemented, including
greater incentives for Health Maintenance Organizations.

I urge the new Congress to compare my Plan with the alternatives--programs
which either do too little to improve the health care needs of Americans
most in need or programs which would impose substantial financial burdens
on the American taxpayers. I hope the Congress will see the need for and
the benefits of my Plan and work toward prompt enactment. We cannot afford
further delay in this vital area.

HEALTH CARE COST CONTROL

Inflation in health care costs remains unacceptably high. Throughout my
Administration, legislation to reduce health care cost inflation was one of
my highest priorities, but was not passed by the Congress. Therefore, my FY
1982 budget proposes sharing the responsibility for health care cost
control with the private sector, through voluntary hospital cost guidelines
and intensified monitoring. In the longer term, the health care
reimbursement system must be reformed. We must move away from inflationary
cost-based reimbursement and fee-for-service, and toward a system of
prospective reimbursement, under which health care providers would operate
within predetermined budgets. This reimbursement reform is essential to
ultimately control inflation in health care costs, and will be a
significant challenge to the new Congress.

HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION

During my Administration, the Surgeon General released "Healthy People," a
landmark report on health promotion and disease prevention. The report
signals the growing consensus that the Nation's health strategy must be
refocused in the 1980's to emphasize the prevention of disease.
Specifically, the report lays out measurable and achieveable goals in the
reduction of mortality which can be reached by 1990.

I urge the new Congress to endorse the principles of "Healthy People," and
to adopt the recommendations to achieve its goals. This will necessitate
adoption of a broader concept of health care, to include such areas as
environmental health, workplace health and safety, commercial product
safety, traffic safety, and health education, promotion and information.

MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH

Ensuring a healthy start in life for children remains not only a high
priority of my Administration, but also one of the most cost effective
forms of health care.

When I took office, immunization levels for preventable childhood diseases
had fallen to 70%. As a result of a concerted nationwide effort during my
Administration, I am pleased to report that now at least 90% of children
under 15, and virtually all school-age children are immunized. In addition,
reported cases of measles and mumps are at their lowest levels ever.

Under the National Health Plan I have proposed, there would be no
cost-sharing for prenatal and delivery services for all pregnant women and
for acute care provided to infants in their first year of life. These
preventive services have extremely high returns in terms of improved
newborn and long-term child health.

Under the Child Health Assurance Program (CHAP) legislation which I
submitted to the Congress, and which passed the House, an additional two
million low-income children under 18 would become eligible for Medicaid
benefits, which would include special health assessments. CHAP would also
improve the continuity of care for the nearly 14 million children now
eligible for Medicaid. An additional 100,000 low-income pregnant women
would become eligible for prenatal care under the proposal. I strongly urge
the new Congress to enact CHAP and thereby provide millions of needy
children with essential health services. The legislation has had strong
bipartisan support, which should continue as the details of the bill are
completed.

I also urge the new Congress to provide strong support for two highly
successful ongoing programs: the special supplemental food program for
women, infants and children (WIC) and Family Planning. The food supplements
under WIC have been shown to effectively prevent ill health and thereby
reduce later medical costs. The Family Planning program has been effective
at reducing unwanted pregnancies among low-income women and adolescents.

EXPANSION OF SERVICES TO THE POOR AND UNDERSERVED

During my Administration, health services to the poor and underserved have
been dramatically increased. The number of National Health Service Corps
(NHSC) assignees providing services in medically underserved communities
has grown from 500 in 1977 to nearly 3,000 in 1981. The population served
by the NHSC has more than tripled since 1977. The number of Community
Health Centers providing services in high priority underserved areas has
doubled during my Administration, and will serve an estimated six million
people in 1981. I strongly urge the new Congress to support these highly
successful programs.

MENTAL HEALTH

One of the most significant health achievements during my Administration
was the recent passage of the Mental Health Systems Act, which grew out of
recommendations of my Commission on Mental Health. I join many others in my
gratitude to the First Lady for her tireless and effective contribution to
the passage of this important legislation.

The Act is designed to inaugurate a new era of Federal and State
partnership in the planning and provision of mental health services. In
addition, the Act specifically provides for prevention and support services
to the chronically mentally ill to prevent unnecessary institutionalization
and for the development of community-based mental health services. I urge
the new Congress to provide adequate support for the full and timely
implementation of this Act.

HEALTH PROTECTION

With my active support, the Congress recently passed "Medigap" legislation,
which provides for voluntary certification of health insurance policies
supplemental to Medicare, to curb widespread abuses in this area.

In the area of toxic agent control, legislation which I submitted to the
Congress recently passed. This will provide for a "super-fund" to cover
hazardous waste cleanup costs.

In the area of accidental injury control, we have established automobile
safety standards and increased enforcement activities with respect to the
55 MPH speed limit. By the end of the decade these actions are expected to
save over 13,000 lives and 100,000 serious injuries each year.

I urge the new Congress to continue strong support for all these
activities.

FOOD AND NUTRITION

Building on the comprehensive reform of the Food Stamp Program that I
proposed and Congress passed in 1977, my Administration and the Congress
worked together in 1979 and 1980 to enact several other important changes
in the Program. These changes will further simplify administration and
reduce fraud and error, will make the program more responsive to the needs
of the elderly and disabled, and will increase the cap on allowable program
expenditures. The Food Stamp Act will expire at the end of fiscal 1981. It
is essential that the new Administration and the Congress continue this
program to ensure complete eradication of the debilitating malnutrition
witnessed and documented among thousands of children in the 1960's.

DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION

At the beginning of my Administration there were over a half million heroin
addicts in the United States. Our continued emphasis on reducing the supply
of heroin, as well as providing treatment and rehabilitation to its
victims, has reduced the heroin addict population, reduced the number of
heroin overdose deaths by 80%, and reduced the number of heroin related
injuries by 50%. We have also seen and encouraged a national movement of
parents and citizens committed to reversing the very serious and disturbing
trends of adolescent drug abuse.

Drug abuse in many forms will continue to detract, however, from the
quality of life of many Americans. To prevent that, I see four great
challenges in the years ahead. First, we must deal aggressively with the
supplies of illegal drugs at their source, through joint crop destruction
programs with foreign nations and increased law enforcement and border
interdiction. Second, we must look to citizens and parents across the
country to help educate the increasing numbers of American youth who are
experimenting with drugs to the dangers of drug abuse. Education is a key
factor in reducing drug abuse. Third, we must focus our efforts on drug and
alcohol abuse in the workplace for not only does this abuse contribute to
low productivity but it also destroys the satisfaction and sense of purpose
all Americans can gain from the work experience. Fourth, we need a change
in attitude, from an attitude which condones the casual use of drugs to one
that recognizes the appropriate use of drugs for medical purposes and
condemns the inappropriate and harmful abuse of drugs. I hope the Congress
and the new Administration will take action to meet each of these
challenges.

EDUCATION

The American people have always recognized that education is one of the
soundest investments they can make. The dividends are reflected in every
dimension of our national life--from the strength of our economy and
national security to the vitality of our music, art, and literature. Among
the accomplishments that have given me the most satisfaction over the last
four years are the contributions that my Administration has been able to
make to the well-being of students and educators throughout the country.

This Administration has collaborated successfully with the Congress on
landmark education legislation. Working with the Congressional leadership,
my Administration spotlighted the importance of education by creating a new
Department of Education. The Department has given education a stronger
voice at the Federal level, while at the same time reserving the actual
control and operation of education to states, localities, and private
institutions. The Department has successfully combined nearly 150 Federal
education programs into a cohesive, streamlined organization that is more
responsive to the needs of educators and students. The Department has made
strides to cut red tape and paperwork and thereby to make the flow of
Federal dollars to school districts and institutions of higher education
more efficient. It is crucial that the Department be kept intact and
strengthened.

Our collaboration with the Congress has resulted in numerous other
important legislative accomplishments for education. A little over two
years ago, I signed into law on the same day two major bills--one
benefiting elementary and secondary education and the other, postsecondary
education. The Education Amendments of 1978 embodied nearly all of my
Administration's proposals for improvements in the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act, including important new programs to improve students'
achievement in the basic skills and to aid school districts with
exceptionally high concentrations of children from low-income families. The
Middle Income Student Assistance Act, legislation jointly sponsored by this
Administration and the Congressional leadership, expanded eligibility for
need-based Basic Educational Opportunity Grants to approximately one-third
of the students enrolled in post-secondary education and made many more
students eligible for the first time for other types of grants, work-study,
and loans.

Just three and a half months ago, my Administration and the Congress
successfully concluded over two years of work on a major reauthorization
bill that further expands benefits to postsecondary education. Reflected in
the Education Amendments of 1980 are major Administration recommendations
for improvements in the Higher Education Act--including proposals for
better loan access for students; a new parent loan program; simplified
application procedures for student financial aid; a strengthened Federal
commitment to developing colleges, particularly the historically Black
institutions; a new authorization for equipment and facilities
modernization funding for the nation's major research universities; and
revitalized international education programs.

Supplementing these legislative accomplishments have been important
administrative actions aimed at reducing paperwork and simplifying
regulations associated with Federal education programs. We also launched
major initiatives to reduce the backlog of defaulted student loans and
otherwise to curb fraud, abuse, and waste in education programs.

To insure that the education enterprise is ready to meet the scientific and
technological changes of the future, we undertook a major study of the
status of science and engineering education throughout the nation. I hope
that the findings from this report will serve as a springboard for needed
reforms at all levels of education.

I am proud that this Administration has been able to provide the financial
means to realize many of our legislative and administrative goals. Compared
to the previous administration's last budget, I have requested the largest
overall increase in Federal funding for education in our nation's history.
My budget requests have been particularly sensitive to the needs of special
populations like minorities, women, the educationally and economically
disadvantaged, the handicapped, and students with limited English-speaking
ability. At the same time, I have requested significant increases for many
programs designed to enhance the quality of American education, including
programs relating to important areas as diverse as international education,
research libraries, museums, and teacher centers.

Last year, I proposed to the Congress a major legislative initiative that
would direct $2 billion into education and job training programs designed
to alleviate youth unemployment through improved linkages between the
schools and the work place. This legislation generated bipartisan support;
but unfortunately, action on it was not completed in the final, rushed days
of the 96th Congress. I urge the new Congress--as it undertakes broad
efforts to strengthen the economy as well as more specific tasks like
reauthorizing the Vocational Education Act--to make the needs of our
nation's unemployed youth a top priority for action. Only by combining a
basic skills education program together with work training and employment
incentives can we make substantial progress in eliminating one of the most
severe social problems in our nation--youth unemployment, particularly
among minorities. I am proud of the progress already made through passage
of the Youth Employment and Demonstration Project Act of 1977 and the
substantial increase in our investment in youth employment programs. The
new legislation would cap these efforts.

INCOME SECURITY SOCIAL SECURITY

One of the highest priorities of my Administration has been to continue the
tradition of effectiveness and efficiency widely associated with the social
security program, and to assure present and future beneficiaries that they
will receive their benefits as expected. The earned benefits that are paid
monthly to retired and disabled American workers and their families provide
a significant measure of economic protection to millions of people who
might otherwise face retirement or possible disability with fear. I have
enacted changes to improve the benefits of many social security
beneficiaries during my years as President.

The last four years have presented a special set of concerns over the
financial stability of the social security system. Shortly after taking
office I proposed and Congress enacted legislation to protect the stability
of the old age and survivors trust fund and prevent the imminent exhaustion
of the disability insurance trust fund, and to correct a flaw in the
benefit formula that was threatening the long run health of the entire
social security system. The actions taken by the Congress at my request
helped stabilize the system. That legislation was later complemented by the
Disability Insurance Amendments of 1980 which further bolstered the
disability insurance program, and reduced certain inequities among
beneficiaries.

My commitment to the essential retirement and disability protection
provided to 35 million people each month has been demonstrated by the fact
that without interruption those beneficiaries have continued to receive
their social security benefits, including annual cost of living increases.
Changing and unpredictable economic circumstances require that we continue
to monitor the financial stability of the social security system. To
correct anticipated short-term strains on the system, I proposed last year
that the three funds be allowed to borrow from one another, and I urge the
Congress again this year to adopt such interfund borrowing. To further
strengthen the social security system and provide a greater degree of
assurance to beneficiaries, given projected future economic uncertainties,
additional action should be taken. Among the additional financing options
available are borrowing from the general fund, financing half of the
hospital insurance fund with general revenues, and increasing the payroll
tax rate. The latter option is particularly unpalatable given the
significant increase in the tax rate already mandated in law.

This Administration continues to oppose cuts in basic social security
benefits and taxing social security benefits. The Administration continues
to support annual indexing of social security benefits.

WELFARE REFORM

In 1979 I proposed a welfare reform package which offers solutions to some
of the most urgent problems in our welfare system. This proposal is
embodied in two bills, The Work and Training Opportunities Act and The
Social Welfare Reform Amendments Act. The House passed the second of these
two proposals. Within the framework of our present welfare system, my
reform proposals offer achievable means to increase self-sufficiency
through work rather than welfare, more adequate assistance to people unable
to work, the removal of inequities in coverage under current programs, and
fiscal relief needed by States and localities.

Our current welfare system is long overdue for serious reform; the system
is wasteful and not fully effective. The legislation I have proposed will
help eliminate inequities by establishing a national minimum benefit, and
by directly relating benefit levels to the poverty threshold. It will
reduce program complexity, which leads to inefficiency and waste, by
simplifying and coordinating administration among different programs.

I urge the Congress to take action in this area along the lines I have
recommended.

CHILD WELFARE

My Administration has worked closely with the Congress on legislation which
is designed to improve greatly the child welfare services and foster care
programs and to create a Federal system of adoption assistance. These
improvements will be achieved with the recent enactment of H.R. 3434, the
Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980. The well-being of
children in need of homes and their permanent placement have been a primary
concern of my Administration. This legislation will ensure that children
are not lost in the foster care system, but instead will be returned to
their families where possible or placed in permanent adoptive homes.

LOW-INCOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE

In 1979 I proposed a program to provide an annual total of $1.6 billion to
low-income households which are hardest hit by rising energy bills. With
the cooperation of Congress, we were able to move quickly to provide
assistance to eligible households in time to meet their winter heating
bills.

In response to the extreme heat conditions affecting many parts of the
country during 1980, I directed the Community Services Administration to
make available over $27 million to assist low-income individuals,
especially the elderly, facing life threatening circumstances due to
extreme heat.

Congress amended and reauthorized the low-income energy assistance program
for fiscal year 1981, and provided $1.85 billion to meet anticipated
increasing need. The need for a program to help low-income households with
rising energy expenses will not abate in the near future. The low-income
energy assistance program should be reauthorized to meet those needs.

HOUSING

For the past 14 months, high interest rates have had a severe impact on the
nation's housing market. Yet the current pressures and uncertainties should
not obscure the achievements of the past four years.

Working with the Congress, the regulatory agencies, and the financial
community, my Administration has brought about an expanded and steadier
flow of funds into home mortgages. Deregulation of the interest rates
payable by depository institutions, the evolution of variable and
renegotiated rate mortgages, development of high yielding savings
certificates, and expansion of the secondary mortgage market have all
increased housing's ability to attract capital and have assured that
mortgage money would not be cut off when interest rates rose. These actions
will diminish the cyclicality of the housing industry. Further, we have
secured legislation updating the Federal Government's emergency authority
to provide support for the housing industry through the Brooke-Cranston
program, and creating a new Section 235 housing stimulus program. These
tools will enable the Federal Government to deal quickly and effectively
with serious distress in this critical industry.

We have also worked to expand homeownership opportunities for Americans. By
using innovative financing mechanisms, such as the graduated payment
mortgage, we have increased the access of middle income families to housing
credit. By revitalizing the Section 235 program, we have enabled nearly
100,000 moderate income households to purchase new homes. By reducing
paperwork and regulation in Federal programs, and by working with State and
local governments to ease the regulatory burden, we have helped to hold
down housing costs and produce affordable housing.

As a result of these governmentwide efforts, 5 1/2 million more American
families bought homes in the past four years than in any equivalent period
in history. And more than 7 million homes have begun construction during my
Administration, 1 million more than in the previous four years.

We have devoted particular effort to meeting the housing needs of low and
moderate income families. In the past four years, more than 1 million
subsidized units have been made available for occupancy by lower income
Americans and more than 600,000 assisted units have gone into construction.
In addition, we have undertaken a series of measures to revitalize and
preserve the nation's 2 million units of public and assisted housing.

For Fiscal Year 1982, I am proposing to continue our commitment to lower
income housing. I am requesting funds to support 260,000 units of Section 8
and public housing, maintaining these programs at the level provided by
Congress in Fiscal 1981.

While we have made progress in the past four years, in the future there are
reasons for concern. Home price inflation and high interest rates threaten
to put homeownership out of reach for first-time homebuyers. Lower income
households, the elderly and those dependent upon rental housing face rising
rents, low levels of rental housing construction by historic standards, and
the threat of displacement due to conversion to condominiums and other
factors. Housing will face strong competition for investment capital from
the industrial sector generally and the energy industries, in particular.

To address these issues, I appointed a Presidential Task Force and Advisory
Group last October. While this effort will not proceed due to the election
result, I hope the incoming Administration will proceed with a similar
venture.

The most important action government can take to meet America's housing
needs is to restore stability to the economy and bring down the rate of
inflation. Inflation has driven up home prices, operating costs and
interest rates. Market uncertainty about inflation has contributed to the
instability in interest rates, which has been an added burden to
homebuilders and homebuyers alike. By making a long-term commitment to
provide a framework for greater investment, sustained economic growth, and
price stability, my Administration has begun the work of creating a healthy
environment for housing.

TRANSPORTATION

With the passage of the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, the Motor Carrier
Act of 1980, and the Harley O. Staggers Rail Act of 1980, my
Administration, working with the Congress, has initiated a new era of
reduced regulation of transportation industries. Deregulation will lead to
increased productivity and operating efficiencies in the industries
involved, and stimulate price and service competition, to the benefit of
consumers generally. I urge the new Administration to continue our efforts
on behalf of deregulation legislation for the intercity passenger bus
industry as well.

In the coming decade, the most significant challenge facing the nation in
transportation services will be to improve a deteriorating physical
infrastructure of roadways, railroads, waterways and mass transit systems,
in order to conserve costly energy supplies while promoting effective
transportation services.

HIGHWAYS

Our vast network of highways, which account for 90 percent of travel and 80
percent by value of freight traffic goods movement, is deteriorating. If
current trends continue, a major proportion of the Interstate pavement will
have deteriorated by the end of the 1980's.

Arresting the deterioration of the nation's system of highways is a high
priority objective for the 1980's. We must reorient the Federal mission
from major new construction projects to the stewardship of the existing
Interstate Highway System. Interstate gaps should be judged on the
connections they make and on their compatibility with community needs.

During this decade, highway investments will be needed to increase
productivity, particularly in the elimination of bottlenecks, provide more
efficient connections to ports and seek low-cost solutions to traffic
demand.

My Administration has therefore recommended redefining completion of the
Interstate system, consolidating over 27 categorical assistance programs
into nine, and initiating a major repair and rehabilitation program for
segments of the Interstate system. This effort should help maintain the
condition and performance of the Nation's highways, particularly the
Interstate and primary system; provide a realistic means to complete the
Interstate system by 1990; ensure better program delivery through
consolidation, and assist urban revitalization. In addition, the Congress
must address the urgent funding problems of the highway trust fund, and the
need to generate greater revenues.

MASS TRANSIT

In the past decade the nation's public transit systems' ridership increased
at an annual average of 1.1% each year in the 1970's (6.9% in 1979).
Continued increases in the cost of fuel are expected to make transit a
growing part of the nation's transportation system.

As a result, my Administration projected a ten year, $43 billion program to
increase mass transit capacity by 50 percent, and promote more energy
efficient vehicle uses in the next decade. The first part of this proposal
was the five year, $24.7 billion Urban Mass Transportation Administration
reauthorization legislation I sent to the Congress in March, 1980. I urge
the 97th Congress to quickly enact this or similar legislation in 1981.

My Administration was also the first to have proposed and signed into law a
non-urban formula grant program to assist rural areas and small communities
with public transportation programs to end their dependence on the
automobile, promote energy conservation and efficiency, and provide
transportation services to impoverished rural communities.

A principal need of the 1980's will be maintaining mobility for all
segments of the population in the face of severely increasing
transportation costs and uncertainty of fuel supplies. We must improve the
flexibility of our transportation system and offer greater choice and
diversity in transportation services. While the private automobile will
continue to be the principal means of transportation for many Americans,
public transportation can become an increasingly attractive alternative.
We, therefore, want to explore a variety of paratransit modes, various
types of buses, modern rapid transit, regional rail systems and light rail
systems.

Highway planning and transit planning must be integrated and related to
State, regional, district and neighborhood planning efforts now in place or
emerging. Low density development and land use threaten the fiscal capacity
of many communities to support needed services and infrastructure.

ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED TRANSPORTATION

Transportation policies in the 1980's must pay increasing attention to the
needs of the elderly and handicapped. By 1990, the number of people over 65
will have grown from today's 19 million to 27 million. During the same
period, the number of handicapped--people who have difficulty using
transit as well as autos, including the elderly--is expected to increase
from 9 to 11 million, making up 4.5 percent of the population.

We must not retreat from a policy that affords a significant and growing
portion of our population accessible public transportation while
recognizing that the handicapped are a diverse group and will need
flexible, door-to-door service where regular public transportation will not
do the job.

RAILROADS

In addition, the Federal government must reassess the appropriate Federal
role of support for passenger and freight rail services such as Amtrak and
Conrail. Our goal through federal assistance should be to maintain and
enhance adequate rail service, where it is not otherwise available to needy
communities. But Federal subsidies must be closely scrutinized to be sure
they are a stimulus to, and not a replacement for, private investment and
initiative. Federal assistance cannot mean permanent subsidies for
unprofitable operations.

WATERWAYS AND RURAL TRANSPORTATION

There is a growing need in rural and small communities for improved
transportation services. Rail freight service to many communities has
declined as railroads abandon unproductive branch lines. At the same time,
rural roads are often inadequate to handle large, heavily-loaded trucks.
The increased demand for "harvest to harbor" service has also placed an
increased burden on rural transportation systems, while bottlenecks along
the Mississippi River delay grain shipments to the Gulf of Mexico.

We have made some progress:

--To further develop the nation's waterways, my Administration began
construction of a new 1,200 foot lock at the site of Lock and Dam 26 on the
Mississippi River. When opened in 1987, the new lock will have a capacity
of 86 million tons per year, an 18 percent increase over the present
system. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has also undertaken studies to
assess the feasibility of expanding the Bonneville Locks. Rehabilitation of
John Day Lock was begun in 1980 and should be completed in 1982. My
Administration also supports the completion of the Upper Mississippi River
Master Plan to determine the feasibility of constructing a second lock at
Alton, Illinois. These efforts will help alleviate delays in transporting
corn, soybeans and other goods along the Mississippi River to the Gulf of
Mexico.

--The Department of Transportation's new Small Community and Rural
Transportation Policy will target federal assistance for passenger
transportation, roads and highways, truck service, and railroad freight
service to rural areas. This policy implements and expands upon the earlier
White House Initiative, "Improving Transportation in Rural America,"
announced in June, 1979, and the President's "Small Community and Rural
Development Policy" announced in December, 1979. The Congress should seek
ways to balance rail branch line abandonment with the service needs of
rural and farm communities, provide financial assistance to rail branch
line rehabilitation where appropriate, assist shippers to adjust to rail
branch line abandonment where it takes place, and help make it possible for
trucking firms to serve light density markets with dependable and efficient
trucking services.

MARITIME POLICY

During my Administration I have sought to ensure that the U.S. maritime
industry will not have to function at an unfair competitive disadvantage in
the international market. As I indicated in my maritime policy statement to
the Congress in July, 1979, the American merchant marine is vital to our
Nation's welfare, and Federal actions should promote rather than harm it.
In pursuit of this objective, I signed into law the Controlled Carrier Act
of 1978, authorizing the Federal Maritime Commission to regulate certain
rate cutting practices of some state-controlled carriers, and recently
signed a bilateral maritime agreement with the People's Republic of China
that will expand the access of American ships to 20 specified Chinese
ports, and set aside for American-flag ships a substantial share (at least
one-third) of the cargo between our countries. This agreement should
officially foster expanded U.S. and Chinese shipping services linking the
two countries, and will provide further momentum to the growth of
Sino-American trade.

There is also a need to modernize and expand the dry bulk segment of our
fleet. Our heavy dependence on foreign carriage of U.S.-bulk cargoes
deprives the U.S. economy of seafaring and shipbuilding jobs, adds to the
balance-of-payments deficit, deprives the Government of substantial tax
revenues, and leaves the United States dependent on foreign-flag shipping
for a continued supply of raw materials to support the civil economy and
war production in time of war.

I therefore sent to the Congress proposed legislation to strengthen this
woefully weak segment of the U.S.-flag fleet by removing certain
disincentives to U.S. construction of dry bulkers and their operation under
U.S. registry. Enactment of this proposed legislation would establish the
basis for accelerating the rebuilding of the U.S.-flag dry bulk fleet
toward a level commensurate with the position of the United States as the
world's leading bulk trading country.

During the past year the Administration has stated its support for
legislation that would provide specific Federal assistance for the
installation of fuel-efficient engines in existing American ships, and
would strengthen this country's shipbuilding mobilization base.
Strengthening the fleet is important, but we must also maintain our
shipbuilding base for future ship construction.

Provisions in existing laws calling for substantial or exclusive use of
American-flag vessels to carry cargoes generated by the Government must be
vigorously pursued.

I have therefore supported requirements that 50 percent of oil purchased
for the strategic petroleum reserve be transported in U.S.-flag vessels,
that the Cargo Preference Act be applied to materials furnished for the
U.S. assisted construction of air bases in Israel, and to cargoes
transported pursuant to the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act. In
addition, the deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources Act requires that at least
one ore carrier per mine site be a U.S.-flag vessel.

Much has been done, and much remains to be done. The FY 1982 budget
includes a $107 million authorization for Construction Differential Subsidy
("CDS") funds which, added to the unobligated CDS balance of $100 million
from 1980, and the recently enacted $135 million 1981 authorization, will
provide an average of $171 million in CDS funds in 1981 and 1982.

COAL EXPORT POLICY

While significant growth in foreign demand for U.S. steam coal is foreseen,
congestion at major U.S. coal exporting ports such as Hampton Roads,
Virginia, and Baltimore, Maryland, could delay and impede exports.

My Administration has worked through the Interagency Coal Task Force Study,
which I created, to promote cooperation and coordination of resources
between shippers, railroads, vessel broker/ operators and port operators,
and to determine the most appropriate Federal role in expanding and
modernizing coal export facilities, including dredging deeper channels at
selected ports.

Some progress has already been made. In addition to action taken by
transshippers to reduce the number of coal classifications used whenever
possible, by the Norfolk and Western Railroad to upgrade its computer
capability to quickly inventory its coal cars in its yards, and by the
Chessie Railroad which is reactivating Pier 15 in Newport News and has
established a berth near its Curtis Bay Pier in Baltimore to decrease
delays in vessel berthing, public activities will include:

--A $26.5 million plan developed by the State of Pennsylvania and Conrail
to increase Conrail's coal handling capacity at Philadelphia;

--A proposal by the State of Virginia to construct a steam coal port on
the Craney Island Disposal area in Portsmouth harbor;

--Plans by Mobile, Alabama, which operates the only publicly owned coal
terminal in the U.S. to enlarge its capacity at McDuffie Island to 10
million tons ground storage and 100 car unit train unloading capability;

--Development at New Orleans of steam coal facilities that are expected to
add over 20 million tons of annual capacity by 1983; and

--The Corps of Engineers, working with other interested Federal agencies,
will determine which ports should be dredged, to what depth and on what
schedule, in order to accommodate larger coal carrying vessels.

Private industry will, of course, play a major role in developing the
United States' coal export facilities. The new Administration should
continue to work to eliminate transportation bottlenecks that impede our
access to foreign markets.

Special Needs

WOMEN

The past four years have been years of rapid advancement for women. Our
focus has been two-fold: to provide American women with a full range of
opportunities and to make them a part of the mainstream of every aspect of
our national life and leadership.

I have appointed a record number of women to judgeships and to top
government posts. Fully 22 percent of all my appointees are women, and I
nominated 41 of the 46 women who sit on the Federal bench today. For the
first time in our history, women occupy policymaking positions at the
highest level of every Federal agency and department and have demonstrated
their ability to serve our citizens well.

We have strengthened the rights of employed women by consolidating and
strengthening enforcement of sex discrimination laws under the EEOC, by
expanding employment rights of pregnant women through the Pregnancy
Disability Bill, and by increasing federal employment opportunities for
women through civil service reform, and flexi-time and part-time
employment.

By executive order, I created the first national program to provide women
businessowners with technical assistance, grants, loans, and improved
access to federal contracts.

We have been sensitive to the needs of women who are homemakers. I
established an Office of Families within HHS and sponsored the White House
Conference on Families. We initiated a program targeting CETA funds to help
displaced homemakers. The Social Security system was amended to eliminate
the widow's penalty and a comprehensive study of discriminatory provisions
and possible changes was presented to Congress. Legislation was passed to
give divorced spouses of foreign service officers rights to share in
pension benefits.

We created an office on domestic violence within HHS to coordinate the 12
agencies that now have domestic violence relief programs, and to distribute
information on the problem and the services available to victims.

Despite a stringent budget for FY 1981, the Administration consistently
supported the Women's Educational Equity Act and family planning
activities, as well as other programs that affect women, such as food
stamps, WIC, and social security.

We have been concerned not only about the American woman's opportunities,
but ensuring equality for women around the world. In November, 1980, I sent
to the Senate the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women. This United Nations document is the most
comprehensive and detailed international agreement which seeks the
advancement of women.

On women's issues, I have sought the counsel of men and women in and out of
government and from all regions of our country. I established two panels--
the President's Advisory Committee for Women and the Interdepartmental Task
Force on Women--to advise me on these issues. The mandate for both groups
expired on December 31, but they have left behind a comprehensive review of
the status of women in our society today. That review provides excellent
guidance for the work remaining in our battle against sex discrimination.

Even though we have made progress, much remains on the agenda for women. I
remain committed to the Equal Rights Amendment and will continue to work
for its passage. It is essential to the goal of bringing America's women
fully into the mainstream of American life that the ERA be ratified.

The efforts begun for women in employment, business and education should be
continued and strengthened. Money should be available to states to
establish programs to help the victims of domestic violence. Congress
should pass a national health care plan and a welfare reform program, and
these measures should reflect the needs of women.

The talents of women should continue to be used to the fullest inside and
outside of government, and efforts should continue to see that they have
the widest range of opportunities and options.

HANDICAPPED

I hope that my Administration will be remembered in this area for leading
the way toward full civil rights for handicapped Americans. When I took
office, no federal agency had yet issued 504 regulations. As I leave
office, this first step by every major agency and department in the federal
government is almost complete. But it is only a first step. The years ahead
will require steadfast dedication by the President to protect and promote
these precious rights in the classroom, in the workplace, and in all public
facilities so that handicapped individuals may join the American mainstream
and contribute to the fullest their resources and talents to our economic
and social life.

Just as we supported, in an unprecedented way, the civil rights of disabled
persons in schools and in the workplace, other initiatives in health
prevention, such as our immunization and nutrition programs for young
children and new intense efforts to reverse spinal cord injury, must
continue so that the incidence of disability continues to decline.

This year is the U.N.-declared International Year of Disabled Persons. We
are organizing activities to celebrate and promote this important
commemorative year within the government as well as in cooperation with
private sector efforts in this country and around the world. The
International Year will give our country the opportunity to recognize the
talents and capabilities of our fellow citizens with disabilities. We can
also share our rehabilitation and treatment skills with other countries and
learn from them as well. I am proud that the United States leads the world
in mainstreaming and treating disabled people. However, we have a long way
to go before all psychological and physical barriers to disabled people are
torn down and they can be full participants in our American way of life. We
must pledge our full commitment to this goal during the International Year.

FAMILIES

Because of my concern for American families, my Administration convened
last year the first White House Conference on Families which involved seven
national hearings, over 506 state and local events, three White House
Conferences, and the direct participation of more than 125,000 citizens.
The Conference reaffirmed the centrality of families in our lives and
nation but documented problems American families face as well. We also
established the Office of Families within the Department of Health and
Human Services to review government policies and programs that affect
families.

I expect the departments and agencies within the executive branch of the
Federal government as well as Members of Congress, corporate and business
leaders, and State and local officials across the country, to study closely
the recommendations of the White House Conference and implement them
appropriately. As public policy is developed and implemented by the Federal
government, cognizance of the work of the Conference should be taken as a
pragmatic and essential step.

The Conference has done a good job of establishing an agenda for action to
assure that the policies of the Federal government are more sensitive in
their impact on families. I hope the Congress will review and seriously
consider the Conference's recommendations.

OLDER AMERICANS

My Administration has taken great strides toward solving the difficult
problems faced by older Americans. Early in my term we worked successfully
with the Congress to assure adequate revenues for the Social Security Trust
Funds. And last year the strength of the Social Security System was
strengthened by legislation I proposed to permit borrowing among the
separate trust funds. I have also signed into law legislation prohibiting
employers from requiring retirement prior to age 70, and removing mandatory
retirement for most Federal employees. In addition, my Administration
worked very closely with Congress to amend the Older Americans Act in a way
that has already improved administration of its housing, social services,
food delivery, and employment programs.

This year, I will be submitting to Congress a budget which again
demonstrates my commitment to programs for the elderly. It will include, as
my previous budgets have, increased funding for nutrition, senior centers
and home health care, and will focus added resources on the needs of older
Americans.

With the 1981 White House Conference on Aging approaching, I hope the new
Administration will make every effort to assure an effective and useful
conference. This Conference should enable older Americans to voice their
concerns and give us guidance in our continued efforts to ensure the
quality of life so richly deserved by our senior citizens.

REFUGEES

We cannot hope to build a just and humane society at home if we ignore the
humanitarian claims of refugees, their lives at stake, who have nowhere
else to turn. Our country can be proud that hundreds of thousands of people
around the world would risk everything they have--including their own
lives--to come to our country.

This Administration initiated and implemented the first comprehensive
reform of our refugee and immigration policies in over 25 years. We also
established the first refugee coordination office in the Department of
State under the leadership of a special ambassador and coordinator for
refugee affairs and programs. The new legislation and the coordinator's
office will bring common sense and consolidation to our Nation's previously
fragmented, inconsistent, and in many ways, outdated, refugee and
immigration policies.

With the unexpected arrival of thousands of Cubans and Haitians who sought
refuge in our country last year, outside of our regular immigration and
refugee admissions process, our country and its government were tested in
being compassionate and responsive to a major human emergency. Because we
had taken steps to reorganize our refugee programs, we met that test
successfully. I am proud that the American people responded to this crisis
with their traditional good will and hospitality. Also, we would never have
been able to handle this unprecedented emergency without the efforts of the
private resettlement agencies who have always been there to help refugees
in crises.

Immigrants to this country always contribute more toward making our country
stronger than they ever take from the system. I am confident that the
newest arrivals to our country will carry on this tradition.

While we must remain committed to aiding and assisting those who come to
our shores, at the same time we must uphold our immigration and refugee
policies and provide adequate enforcement resources. As a result of our
enforcement policy, the illegal flow from Cuba has been halted and an
orderly process has been initiated to make certain that our refugee and
immigration laws are honored.

This year the Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy will
complete its work and forward its advice and recommendations. I hope that
the recommendations will be carefully considered by the new Administration
and the Congress, for it is clear that we must take additional action to
keep our immigration policy responsive to emergencies and ever changing
times.

VETERANS

This country and its leadership has a continuing and unique obligation to
the men and women who served their nation in the armed forces and help
maintain or restore peace in the world.

My commitment to veterans, as evidenced by my record, is characterized by a
conscientious and consistent emphasis in these general areas:

First, we have worked to honor the Vietnam veteran. During my
Administration, and under the leadership of VA Administrator Max Cleland, I
was proud to lead our country in an overdue acknowledgement of our Nation's
gratitude to the men and women who served their country during the bitter
war in Southeast Asia. Their homecoming was deferred and seemed doomed to
be ignored. Our country has matured in the last four years and at long last
we were able to separate the war from the warrior and honor these veterans.
But with our acknowledgement of their service goes an understanding that
some Vietnam veterans have unique needs and problems.

My Administration was able to launch a long sought after psychological
readjustment and outreach program, unprecedented in its popularity,
sensitivity and success. This program must be continued. The Administration
has also grappled with the difficult questions posed by some veterans who
served in Southeast Asia and were exposed to potentially harmful
substances, including the herbicide known as Agent Orange. We have launched
scientific inquiries that should answer many veterans' questions about
their health and should provide the basis for establishing sound
compensation policy. We cannot rest until their concerns are dealt with in
a sensitive, expeditious and compassionate fashion.

Second, we have focused the VA health care system in the needs of the
service-connected disabled veteran. We initiated and are implementing the
first reform of the VA vocational rehabilitation system since its inception
in 1943. Also, my Administration was the first to seek a cost-of-living
increase for the recipients of VA compensation every year. My last budget
also makes such a request. The Administration also launched the Disabled
Veterans Outreach Program in the Department of Labor which has successfully
placed disabled veterans in jobs. Services provided by the VA health care
system will be further targeted to the special needs of disabled veterans
during the coming year.

Third, the VA health care system, the largest in the free world, has
maintained its independence and high quality during my Administration. We
have made the system more efficient and have therefore treated more
veterans than ever before by concentrating on out-patient care and through
modern management improvements. As the median age of the American veteran
population increases, we must concentrate on further changes within the VA
system to keep it independent and to serve as a model to the nation and to
the world as a center for research, treatment and rehabilitation.

Government Assistance

GENERAL AID TO STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

Since taking office, I have been strongly committed to strengthening the
fiscal and economic condition of our Nation's State and local governments.
I have accomplished this goal by encouraging economic development of local
communities, and by supporting the General Revenue Sharing and other
essential grant-in-aid programs.

GRANTS-IN-AID TO STATES AND LOCALITIES

During my Administration, total grants-in-aid to State and local
governments have increased by more than 40 percent, from $68 billion in
Fiscal Year 1977 to $96 billion in Fiscal Year 1981. This significant
increase in aid has allowed States and localities to maintain services that
are essential to their citizens without imposing onerous tax burdens. It
also has allowed us to establish an unprecedented partnership between the
leaders of the Federal government and State and local government elected
officials.

GENERAL REVENUE SHARING

Last year Congress enacted legislation that extends the General Revenue
Sharing program for three more years. This program is the cornerstone of
our efforts to maintain the fiscal health of our Nation's local government.
It will provide $4.6 billion in each of the next three years to cities,
counties and towns. This program is essential to the continued ability of
our local governments to provide essential police, fire and sanitation
services.

This legislation renewing GRS will be the cornerstone of
Federal-State-local government relations in the 1980's. This policy will
emphasize the need for all levels of government to cooperate in order to
meet the needs of the most fiscally strained cities and counties, and also
will emphasize the important role that GRS can play in forging this
partnership. I am grateful that Congress moved quickly to assure that our
Nation's localities can begin the 1980's in sound fiscal condition.

COUNTER-CYCLICAL ASSISTANCE

Last year, I proposed that Congress enact a $1 billion counter-cyclical
fiscal assistance program to protect States and localities from unexpected
changes in the national economy. This program unfortunately was not enacted
by the (full) Congress. I, therefore, have not included funding for
counter-cyclical aid in my Fiscal Year 1982 budget. Nevertheless, I urge
Congress to enact a permanent stand-by counter-cyclical program, so that
States and cities can be protected during the next economic downturn.

URBAN POLICY

Three years ago, I proposed the Nation's first comprehensive urban policy.
That policy involved more than one hundred improvements in existing Federal
programs, four new Executive Orders and nineteen pieces of urban-oriented
legislation. With Congress' cooperation, sixteen of these bills have now
been signed into law.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

One of the principal goals of my domestic policy has been to strengthen the
private sector economic base of our Nation's economically troubled urban
and rural areas. With Congress' cooperation, we have substantially expanded
the Federal government's economic development programs and provided new tax
incentives for private investment in urban and rural communities. These
programs have helped many communities to attract new private sector jobs
and investments and to retain the jobs and investments that already are in
place.

When I took office, the Federal government was spending less than $300
million annually on economic development programs, and only $60 million of
those funds in our Nation's urban areas. Since that time, we have created
the Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program and substantially
expanded the economic development programs in the Commerce Department. My
FY 1982 budget requests more than $1.5 billion for economic development
grants, loans and interest subsidies and almost $1.5 billion for loan
guarantees. Approximately 60 percent of these funds will be spent in our
Nation's urban areas. In addition, we have extended the 10 percent
investment credit to include rehabilitation of existing industrial
facilities as well as new construction.

I continue to believe that the development of private sector investment and
jobs is the key to revitalizing our Nation's economically depressed urban
and rural areas. To ensure that the necessary economic development goes
forward, the Congress must continue to provide strong support for the UDAG
program and the programs for the Economic Development Administration. Those
programs provide a foundation for the economic development of our Nation in
the 1980's.

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

The partnership among Federal, State and local governments to revitalize
our Nation's communities has been a high priority of my Administration.
When I took office, I proposed a substantial expansion of the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) program and the enactment of a new $400
million Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program. Both of these
programs have provided essential community and economic development
assistance to our Nation's cities and counties.

Last year, Congress reauthorized both the CDBG and UDAG programs. The CDBG
program was reauthorized for three more years with annual funding increases
of $150 million, and the UDAG program was extended for three years at the
current funding level of $675 million annually. My 1982 budget requests
full funding for both of these programs. These actions should help our
Nation's cities and counties to continue the progress they have made in the
last three years.

NEIGHBORHOODS

During my Administration we have taken numerous positive steps to achieve a
full partnership of neighborhood organizations and government at all
levels. We have successfully fought against red lining and housing
discrimination. We created innovative Self Help funding and technical
resource transfer mechanisms. We have created unique methods of access for
neighborhood organizations to have a participating role in Federal and
State government decision-making. Neighborhood based organizations are the
threshold of the American community.

The Federal government will need to develop more innovative and practical
ways for neighborhood based organizations to successfully participate in
the identification and solution of local and neighborhood concerns. Full
partnership will only be achieved with the knowing participation of leaders
of government, business, education and unions. Neither state nor Federal
solutions imposed from on high will suffice. Neighborhoods are the fabric
and soul of this great land. Neighborhoods define the weave that has been
used to create a permanent fabric. The Federal government must take every
opportunity to provide access and influence to the individuals and
organizations affected at the neighborhood level.

Rural Policy

Since the beginning of my Administration, I have been committed to
improving the effectiveness with which the Federal government deals with
the problems and needs of a rapidly changing rural America. The rapid
growth of some rural areas has placed a heavy strain on communities and
their resources. There are also persistent problems of poverty and economic
stagnation in other parts of rural America. Some rural areas continue to
lose population, as they have for the past several decades.

In December, 1979, I announced the Small Community and Rural Development
Policy. It was the culmination of several years' work and was designed to
address the varying needs of our rural population. In 1980, my
Administration worked with the Congress to pass the Rural Development
Policy Act of 1980, which when fully implemented will allow us to meet the
needs of rural people and their communities more effectively and more
efficiently.

As a result of the policy and the accompanying legislation, we have:

--Created the position of Under Secretary of Agriculture for Small
Community and Rural Development to provide overall leadership.

--Established a White House Working Group to assist in the implementation
of the policy.

--Worked with more than 40 governors to form State rural development
councils to work in partnership with the White House Working Group, and the
Federal agencies, to better deliver State and Federal programs to rural
areas.

--Directed the White House Working Group to annually review existing and
proposed policies, programs, and budget levels to determine their adequacy
in meeting rural needs and the fulfilling of the policy's objectives and
principles.

This effort on the part of my Administration and the Congress has resulted
in a landmark policy. For the first time, rural affairs has received the
prominence it has always deserved. It is a policy that can truly help
alleviate the diverse and differing problems rural America will face in the
1980's.

With the help and dedication of a great many people around the country who
are concerned with rural affairs, we have constructed a mechanism for
dealing effectively with rural problems. There is now a great opportunity
to successfully combine Federal efforts with the efforts of rural community
leaders and residents. It is my hope this spirit of cooperation and record
of accomplishment will be continued in the coming years.

CONSUMERS

In September, 1979, I signed an Executive Order designed to strengthen and
coordinate Federal consumer programs and to establish procedures to improve
and facilitate consumer participation in government decision-making. Forty
Federal agencies have adopted programs to comply with the requirements of
the Order. These programs will improve complaint handling, provide better
information to consumers, enhance opportunities for public participation in
government proceedings, and assure that the consumer point of view is
considered in all programs, policies, and regulations.

While substantial progress has been made in assuring a consumer presence in
Federal agencies, work must continue to meet fully the goals of the
Executive Order. Close monitoring of agency compliance with the
requirements of the Order is necessary. Continued evaluation to assure that
the programs are effective and making maximum use of available resources is
also essential. As a complement to these initiatives, efforts to provide
financial assistance in regulatory proceedings to citizen groups, small
businesses, and others whose participation is limited by their economic
circumstances must continue to be pursued.

It is essential that consumer representatives in government pay particular
attention to the needs and interests of low-income consumers and
minorities. The Office of Consumer Affairs' publication, "People Power:
What Communities Are Doing to Counter Inflation," catalogues some of the
ways that government and the private sector can assist the less powerful in
our society to help themselves. New ways should be found to help foster
this new people's movement which is founded on the principle of
self-reliance.

Science and Technology

Science and technology contribute immeasurably to the lives of all
Americans. Our high standard of living is largely the product of the
technology that surrounds us in the home or factory. Our good health is due
in large part to our ever increasing scientific understanding. Our national
security is assured by the application pate science and technology will
bring.

The Federal government has a special role to play in science and
technology. Although the fruits of scientific achievements surround us, it
is often difficult to predict the benefits that will arise from a given
scientific venture. And these benefits, even if predictable, do not usually
lead to ownership rights. Accordingly, the Government has a special
obligation to support science as an investment in our future.

My Administration has sought to reverse a decade-long decline in funding.
Despite the need for fiscal restraint, real support of basic research has
grown nearly 11% during my term in office. And, my Administration has
sought to increase the support of long-term research in the variety of
mission agencies. In this way, we can harness the American genius for
innovation to meet the economic, energy, health, and security challenges
that confront our nation.

--International Relations and National Security. Science and technology
are becoming increasingly important elements of our national security and
foreign policies. This is especially so in the current age of sophisticated
defense systems and of growing dependence among all countries on modern
technology for all aspects of their economic strength. For these reasons,
scientific and technological considerations have been integral elements of
the Administration's decision-making on such national security and foreign
policy issues as the modernization of our strategic weaponry, arms control,
technology transfer, the growing bilateral relationship with China, and our
relations with the developing world.

Four themes have shaped U.S. policy in international scientific and
technological cooperation: pursuit of new international initiatives to
advance our own research and development objectives; development and
strengthening of scientific exchange to bridge politically ideological, and
cultural divisions between this country and other countries; formulation of
programs and institutional relations to help developing countries use
science and technology beneficially; and cooperation with other nations to
manage technologies with local impact. At my direction, my Science and
Technology Adviser has actively pursued international programs in support
of these four themes. We have given special attention to scientific and
technical relations with China, to new forms of scientific and technical
cooperation with Japan, to cooperation with Mexico, other Latin American
and Caribbean countries and several states in Black America, and to the
proposed Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.

In particular our cooperation with developing countries reflects the
importance that each of them has placed on the relationship between
economic growth and scientific and technological capability. It also
reflects their view that the great strength of the U.S. in science and
technology makes close relations with the U.S. technical community an
especially productive means of enhancing this capability. Scientific and
technological assistance is a key linkage between the U.S. and the
developing world, a linkage that has been under-utilized in the past and
one which we must continue to work to strengthen.

--Space Policy. The Administration has established a framework for a
strong and evolving space program for the 1980's.

The Administration's space policy reaffirmed the separation of military
space systems and the open civil space program, and at the same time,
provided new guidance on technology transfer between the civil and military
programs. The civil space program centers on three basic tenets: First, our
space policy will reflect a balanced strategy of applications, science, and
technology development. Second, activities will be pursued when they can be
uniquely or more efficiently accomplished in space. Third, a premature
commitment to a high challenge, space-engineering initiative of the
complexity of Apollo is inappropriate. As the Shuttle development phases
down, however, there will be added flexibility to consider new space
applications, space science and new space exploration activities.

--Technology Development. The Shuttle dominates our technology development
effort and correctly so. It represents one of the most sophisticated
technological challenges ever undertaken, and as a result, has encountered
technical problems. Nonetheless, the first manned orbital flight is now
scheduled for March, 1981. I have been pleased to support strongly the
necessary funds for the Shuttle throughout my Administration.

--Space Applications. Since 1972, the U.S. has conducted experimental
civil remote sensing through Landsat satellites, thereby realizing many
successful applications. Recognizing this fact, I directed the
implementation of an operational civil land satellite remote sensing
system, with the operational management responsibility in Commerce's
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, because ocean
observations from space can meet common civil and military data
requirements, a National Oceanic Satellite System has been proposed as a
major FY 1981 new start.

--Space Science Exploration. The goals of this Administration's policy in
space science have been to: (1) continue a vigorous program of planetary
exploration to understand the origin and evolution of the solar system; (2)
utilize the space telescope and free-flying satellites to usher in a new
era of astronomy; (3) develop a better understanding of the sun and its
interaction with the terrestrial environment; and (4) utilize the Shuttle
and Spacelab to conduct basic research that complements earth-based life
science investigations.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Washington, D.C., is home to both the Federal Government and to more than
half a million American citizens. I have worked to improve the relationship
between the Federal establishment and the Government of the District of
Columbia in order to further the goals and spirit of home rule. The City
controls more of its own destiny than was the case four years ago. Yet,
despite the close cooperation between my Administration and that of Mayor
Barry, we have not yet seen the necessary number of states ratify the
Constitutional Amendment granting full voting representation in the
Congress to the citizens of this city. It is my hope that this inequity
will be rectified. The country and the people who inhabit Washington
deserve no less.

THE ARTS

The arts are a precious national resource.

Federal support for the arts has been enhanced during my Administration by
expanding government funding and services to arts institutions, individual
artists, scholars, and teachers through the National Endowment for the
Arts. We have broadened its scope and reach to a more diverse population.
We have also reactivated the Federal Council on the Arts and Humanities.

It is my hope that during the coming years the new Administration and the
Congress will:

--Continue support of institutions promoting development and understanding
of the arts;

--Encourage business participants in a comprehensive effort to achieve a
truly mixed economy of support for the arts;

--Explore a variety of mechanisms to nurture the creative talent of our
citizens and build audiences for their work;

--Support strong, active National Endowments for the Arts;

--Seek greater recognition for the rich cultural tradition of the nation's
minorities;

--Provide grants for the arts in low-income neighborhoods.

THE HUMANITIES

In recently reauthorizing Federal appropriations for the National Endowment
for the Humanities, the Congress has once again reaffirmed that "the
encouragement and support of national progress and scholarship in the
humanities . . . while primarily a matter for private and local initiative,
is also an appropriate matter of concern to the Federal Government" and
that "a high civilization must not limit its efforts to science and
technology alone but must give full value and support to the other great
branches of man's scholarly and cultural activity in order to achieve a
better understanding of the past, a better analysis of the present, and a
better view of the future."

I believe we are in agreement that the humanities illuminate the values
underlying important personal, social, and national questions raised in our
society by its multiple links to and increasing dependence on technology,
and by the diverse heritage of our many regions and ethnic groups. The
humanities cast light on the broad issue of the role in a society of men
and women of imagination and energy--those individuals who through their
own example define "the spirit of the age," and in so doing move nations.
Our Government's support for the humanities, within the framework laid down
by the Congress, is a recognition of their essential nourishment of the
life of the mind and vital enrichment of our national life.

I will be proposing an increase in funding this year sufficient to enable
the Endowment to maintain the same level of support offered our citizens in
Fiscal Year 1981.

In the allocation of this funding, special emphasis will be given to:

--Humanities education in the nation's schools, in response to the great
needs that have arisen in this area;

--Scholarly research designed to increase our understanding of the
cultures, traditions, and historical forces at work in other nations and in
our own;

--Drawing attention to the physical disintegration of the raw material of
our cultural heritage--books, manuscripts, periodicals, and other
documents--and to the development of techniques to prevent the destruction
and to preserve those materials; and

--The dissemination of quality programming in the humanities to
increasingly large American audiences through the use of radio and
television.

The dominant effort in the Endowment's expenditures will be a commitment to
strengthen and promulgate scholarly excellence and achievement in work in
the humanities in our schools, colleges, universities, libraries, museums
and other cultural institutions, as well as in the work of individual
scholars or collaborative groups engaged in advanced research in the
humanities.

In making its grants the Endowment will increase its emphasis on techniques
which stimulate support for the humanities from non-Federal sources, in
order to reinforce our tradition of private philanthropy in this field, and
to insure and expand the financial viability of our cultural institutions
and life.

INSULAR AREAS

I have been firmly committed to self-determination for Puerto Rico, the
Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands, and
have vigorously supported the realization of whatever political status
aspirations are democratically chosen by their peoples. This principle was
the keystone of the comprehensive territorial policy I sent the Congress
last year. I am pleased that most of the legislative elements of that
policy were endorsed by the 96th Congress.

The unique cultures, fragile economies, and locations of our Caribbean and
Pacific Islands are distinct assets to the United States which require the
sensitive application of policy. The United States Government should pursue
initiatives begun by my Administration and the Congress to stimulate
insular economic development; enhance treatment under Federal programs
eliminating current inequities; provide vitally needed special assistance
and coordinate and rationalize policies. These measures will result in
greater self-sufficiency and balanced growth. In particular, I hope that
the new Congress will support funding for fiscal management, comprehensive
planning and other technical assistance for the territories, as well as
create the commission I have proposed to review the applicability of all
Federal laws to the insular areas and make recommendations for appropriate
modification.

IV. REMOVING GOVERNMENTAL WASTE AND INEFFICIENCY

One of my major commitments has been to restore public faith in our Federal
government by cutting out waste and inefficiency. In the past four years,
we have made dramatic advances toward this goal, many of them previously
considered impossible to achieve. Where government rules and operations
were unnecessary, they have been eliminated, as with airline, rail,
trucking and financial deregulation. Where government functions are needed,
they have been streamlined, through such landmark measures as the Civil
Service Reform Act of 1978. I hope that the new administration and the
Congress will keep up the momentum we have established for effective and
responsible change in this area of crucial public concern.

CIVIL SERVICE REFORM

In March 1978, I submitted the Civil Service Reform Act to Congress. I
called it the centerpiece of my efforts to reform and reorganize the
government. With bipartisan support from Congress, the bill passed, and I
am pleased to say that implementation is running well ahead of the
statutory schedule. Throughout the service, we are putting into place the
means to assure that reward and retention are based on performance and not
simply on length of time on the job. In the first real test of the Reform
Act, 98 percent of the eligible top-level managers joined the Senior
Executive Service, choosing to relinquish job protections for the challenge
and potential reward of this new corps of top executives. Though the Act
does not require several of its key elements to be in operation for another
year, some Federal agencies already have established merit pay systems for
GS-13-15 managers, and most agencies are well on their way to establishing
new performance standards for all their employees. All have paid out, or
are now in the process of paying out, performance bonuses earned by
outstanding members of the Senior Executive Service. Dismissals have
increased by 10 percent, and dismissals specifically for inadequate job
performance have risen 1500 percent, since the Act was adopted. Finally, we
have established a fully independent Merit Systems Protection Board and
Special Counsel to protect the rights of whistle-blowers and other Federal
employees faced with threats to their rights.

In 1981, civil service reform faces critical challenges, all agencies must
have fully functioning performance appraisal systems for all employees, and
merit pay systems for compensating the government's 130,000 GS-13-15
managers. Performance bonuses for members of the Senior Executive Service
will surely receive scrutiny. If this attention is balanced and
constructive, it can only enhance the chances for ultimate success of our
bipartisan commitment to the revolutionary and crucial "pay for
performance" concept.

REGULATORY REFORM

During the past four years we have made tremendous progress in regulatory
reform. We have discarded old economic regulations that prevented
competition and raised consumer costs, and we have imposed strong
management principles on the regulatory programs the country needs, cutting
paperwork and other wasteful burdens. The challenge for the future is to
continue the progress in both areas without crippling vital health and
safety programs.

Our economic deregulation program has achieved major successes in five
areas:

Airlines: The Airline Deregulation Act is generating healthy competition,
saving billions in fares, and making the airlines more efficient. The Act
provides that in 1985 the CAB itself will go out of existence.

Trucking: The trucking deregulation bill opens the industry to competition
and allows truckers wide latitude on the routes they drive and the goods
they haul. The bill also phases out most of the old law's immunity for
setting rates. The Congressional Budget Office estimates these reforms will
save as much as $8 billion per year and cut as much as half a percentage
point from the inflation rate.

Railroads: Overregulation has stifled railroad management initiative,
service, and competitive pricing. The new legislation gives the railroads
the freedom they need to rebuild a strong, efficient railroad industry.

Financial Institutions: With the help of the Congress, over the past four
years we have achieved two major pieces of financial reform legislation,
legislation which has provided the basis for the most far-reaching changes
in the financial services industry since the 1930's. The International
Banking Act of 1978 was designed to reduce the advantages that foreign
banks operating in the United States possessed in comparison to domestic
banks. The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act,
adopted last March, provides for the phased elimination of a variety of
anti-competitive barriers to financial institutions and freedom to offer
services to and attract the savings of consumers, especially small savers.

Recently, I submitted to the Congress my Administration's recommendations
for the phased liberalization of restrictions on geographic expansion by
commercial banks. Last year the Administration and financial regulatory
agencies proposed legislation to permit the interstate acquisition of
failing depository institutions. In view of the difficult outlook for some
depository institutions I strongly urge the Congress to take prompt
favorable action on the failing bank legislation.

Telecommunications: While Congress did not pass legislation in this area,
the Federal Communications Commission has taken dramatic action to open all
aspects of communications to competition and to eliminate regulations in
the areas where competition made them obsolete. The public is benefitting
from an explosion of competition and new services.

While these initiatives represent dramatic progress in economic
deregulation, continued work is needed. I urge Congress to act on
communications legislation and to consider other proposed deregulation
measures, such as legislation on the bus industry. In addition, the
regulatory commissions must maintain their commitment to competition as the
best regulator of all.

The other part of my reform program covers the regulations that are needed
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of our citizens. For these
regulations, my Administration has created a management program to cut
costs without sacrificing goals. Under my Executive Order 12044, we
required agencies to analyze the costs of their major new rules and
consider alternative approaches, such as performance standards and
voluntary codes, that may make rules less costly and more flexible. We
created the Regulatory Analysis Review Group in the White House to analyze
the most costly proposed new rules and find ways to improve them. The
Regulatory Council was established to provide the first Government-wide
listing of upcoming rules and eliminate overlapping and conflicting
regulations. Agencies have launched "sunset" programs to weed out outmoded
old regulations. We have acted to encourage public participation in
regulatory decision-making.

These steps have already saved billions of dollars in regulatory costs and
slashed thousands of outmoded regulations. We are moving steadily toward a
regulatory system that provides needed protections fairly, predictably, and
at minimum cost.

I urge Congress to continue on this steady path and resist the simplistic
solutions that have been proposed as alternatives. Proposals like
legislative veto and increased judicial review will add another layer to
the regulatory process, making it more cumbersome and inefficient. The
right approach to reform is to improve the individual statutes, where they
need change, and to ensure that the regulatory agencies implement those
statutes sensibly.

PAPERWORK REDUCTION

The Federal Government imposes a huge paperwork burden on business, local
government, and the private sector. Many of these forms are needed for
vital government functions, but others are duplicative, overly complex or
obsolete.

During my Administration we cut the paperwork burden by 15 percent, and we
created procedures to continue this progress. The new Paperwork Reduction
Act centralizes, in OMB, oversight of all agencies' information
requirements and strengthens OMB's authority to eliminate needless forms.
The "paperwork budget" process, which I established by executive order,
applies the discipline of the budget process to the hours of reporting time
imposed on the public, forcing agencies to scrutinize all their forms each
year. With effective implementation, these steps should allow further,
substantial paperwork cuts in the years ahead.

TIGHTENING STANDARDS FOR GOVERNMENTAL EFFICIENCY AND INTEGRITY

To develop a foundation to carry out energy policy, we consolidated
scattered energy programs and launched the Synthetic Fuels Corporation; to
give education the priority it deserves and at the same time reduce HHS to
more manageable size, I gave education a seat at the Cabinet table, to
create a stronger system for attacking waste and fraud, I reorganized audit
and investigative functions by putting an Inspector General in major
agencies. Since I took office, we have submitted 14 reorganization
initiatives and had them all approved by Congress. We have saved hundreds
of millions of dollars through the adoption of businesslike cash management
principles and set strict standards for personal financial disclosure and
conflict of interest avoidance by high Federal officials.

To streamline the structure of the government, we have secured approval of
14 reorganization initiatives, improving the efficiency of the most
important sectors of the government, including energy, education, and civil
rights enforcement. We have eliminated more than 300 advisory committees as
well as other agencies, boards and commissions which were obsolete or
ineffective. Independent Inspectors General have been appointed in major
agencies to attack fraud and waste. More than a billion dollars of
questionable transactions have been identified through their audit
activities.

The adoption of business-like cash management and debt collection
initiatives will save over $1 billion, by streamlining the processing of
receipts, by controlling disbursements more carefully, and by reducing idle
cash balances. Finally this Administration has set strict standards for
personal financial disclosure and conflict of interest avoidance by high
Federal officials, to elevate the level of public trust in the government.

V. PROTECTING BASIC RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES

I am extremely proud of the advances we have made in ensuring equality and
protecting the basic freedoms of all Americans.

--The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the Office of
Federal Contract Compliance (OFCCP) have been reorganized and strengthened
and a permanent civil rights unit has been established in OMB.

--To avoid fragmented, inconsistent and duplicative enforcement of civil
rights laws, three agencies have been given coordinative and
standard-setting responsibilities in discrete areas: EEOC for all
employment-related activities, HUD for all those relating to housing, and
the Department of Justice for all other areas.

--With the enactment of the Right to Financial Privacy Act and a bill
limiting police search of newsrooms, we have begun to establish a sound,
comprehensive, privacy program.

Ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment must be aggressively pursued.
Only one year remains in which to obtain ratification by three additional
states.

The Congress must give early attention to a number of important bills which
remain. These bills would:

--strengthen the laws against discrimination in housing. Until it is
enacted, the 1968 Civil Rights Act's promise of equal access to housing
will remain unfulfilled;

--establish a charter for the FBI and the intelligence agencies. The
failure to define in law the duties and responsibilities of these agencies
has made possible some of the abuses which have occurred in recent years;

--establish privacy safeguards for medical research, bank, insurance, and
credit records; and provide special protection for election fund transfer
systems.

EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT

I remain committed as strongly as possible to the ratification of the Equal
Rights Amendment.

As a result of our efforts in 1978, the Equal Rights Amendment's deadline
for ratification was extended for three years. We have now one year and
three States left. We cannot afford any delay in marshalling our resources
and efforts to obtain the ratification of those three additional States.

Although the Congress has no official role in the ratification process at
this point, you do have the ability to affect public opinion and the
support of State Legislators for the Amendment. I urge Members from States
which have not yet ratified the Equal Rights Amendment to use their
influence to secure ratification. I will continue my own efforts to help
ensure ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment.

MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. led this Nation's effort to provide all its
citizens with civil rights and equal opportunities. His commitment to human
rights, peace and non-violence stands as a monument to his humanity and
courage. As one of our Nation's most outstanding leaders, it is appropriate
that his birthday be commemorated as a national holiday. I hope the
Congress will enact legislation this year that will achieve this goal.

FAIR HOUSING

The Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1980 passed the House of Representatives
by an overwhelming bipartisan majority only to die in the Senate at the
close of the 96th Congress. The leaders of both parties have pledged to
make the enactment of fair housing legislation a top priority of the
incoming Congress. The need is pressing and a strengthened federal
enforcement effort must be the primary method of resolution.

CRIMINAL CODE

The Federal criminal laws are often archaic, frequently contradictory and
imprecise, and clearly in need of revision and codification. The new
Administration should continue the work which has been begun to develop a
Federal criminal code which simplifies and clarifies our criminal laws,
while maintaining our basic civil liberties and protections.

PRIVACY

As our public and private institutions collect more and more information
and as communications and computer technologies advance, we must act to
protect the personal privacy of our citizens.

In the past four years we acted on the report of the Privacy Commission and
established a national privacy policy. We worked with Congress to pass
legislation restricting wiretaps and law enforcement access to bank records
and to reporters' files. We reduced the number of personal files held by
the government and restricted the transfer of personal information among
Federal agencies. We also worked with the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development to establish international guidelines to
protect the privacy of personal information that is transferred across
borders.

VI. PROTECTING AND DEVELOPING OUR NATURAL RESOURCES

Two of our Nation's most precious natural resources are our environment and
our vast agricultural capacity. From the beginning of my Administration, I
have worked with the Congress to enhance and protect, as well as develop
our natural resources. In the environmental areas, I have been especially
concerned about the importance of balancing the need for resource
development with preserving a clean environment, and have taken numerous
actions to foster this goal. In the agricultural area, I have taken the
steps needed to improve farm incomes and to increase our agricultural
production to record levels. That progress must be continued in the 1980's.

ENVIRONMENT

Preserving the quality of our environment has been among the most important
objectives of my Administration and of the Congress. As a result of these
shared commitments and the dedicated efforts of many members of the
Congress and my Administration, we have achieved several historic
accomplishments.

PROTECTION OF ALASKA LANDS

Passage of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act was one of
the most important conservation actions of this century. At stake was the
fate of millions of acres of beautiful land, outstanding and unique
wildlife populations, native cultures, and the opportunity to ensure that
future generations of Americans would be able to enjoy the benefits of
these nationally significant resources. As a result of the leadership,
commitment, and persistence of my Administration and the Congressional
leadership, the Alaska Lands Bill was signed into law last December.

The Act adds 97 million acres of new parks and refuges, more than doubling
the size of our National Park and National Wildlife Refuge Systems. The
bill triples the size of our national wilderness system, increasing its
size by 56 million acres. And by adding 25 free-flowing river segments to
the Wild and Scenic River System, the bill almost doubles the river mileage
in that system. The Alaska Lands Act reaffirms our commitment to the
environment and strikes a balance between protecting areas of great beauty
and allowing development of Alaska's oil, gas, mineral, and timber
resources.

PROTECTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES

In addition to the Alaska Lands Act, over the past four years we have been
able to expand significantly the national wilderness and parks systems. In
1978, the Congress passed the historical Omnibus Parks Act, which made 12
additions to the National Park System. The Act also established the first
two national trails since the National Trails System Act was passed in
1968. Then, in 1980, as a result of my 1979 Environmental Message, the
Federal land management agencies have established almost 300 new National
Recreational Trails. With the completion of the RARE II process, which
eliminated the uncertainty surrounding the status of millions of acres of
land, we called for over 15 million acres of new wilderness in the nation's
National Forest, in 1980 the Congress established about 4.5 million acres
of wilderness in the lower 48 states. In addition, the Administration
recommended legislation to protect Lake Tahoe, and through an Executive
Order has already established a mechanism to help ensure the Lake's
protection. Finally, in 1980 the Administration established the Channel
Islands Marine Sanctuary.

Administration actions over the past four years stressed the importance of
providing Federal support only for water resource projects that are
economically and environmentally sound. This policy should have a major and
lasting influence on the federal government's role in water resource
development and management. The Administration's actions to recommend to
the Congress only economically and environmentally sound water resource
projects for funding resulted not only in our opposing uneconomic projects
but also, in 1979, in the first Administration proposal of new project
starts in 4 years.

One of the most significant water policy actions of the past four years was
the Administration's June 6, 1978 Water Policy Reform Message to the
Congress. This Message established a new national water resources policy
with the following objectives:

--to give priority emphasis to water conservation;

--to consider environmental requirements and values more fully and along
with economic factors in the planning and management of water projects and
programs;

--to enhance cooperation between state and federal agencies in water
resources planning and management.

In addition, the Executive Office of the President established 11 policy
decision criteria to evaluate the proposed federal water projects, the
Water Resources Council developed and adopted a new set of Principles and
Standards for water projects which is binding on all federal construction
agencies, and improved regulations were developed to implement the National
Historic Preservation Act and the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act. As a
result, water resource projects must be determined to be economically sound
before the Administration will recommend authorization or appropriation.
Over the years ahead, this policy will help to reduce wasteful federal
spending by targeting federal funds to the highest priority water resource
projects.

In the pursuit of this policy, however, we cannot lose projects. In the
part that sound water resource projects play in providing irrigation,
power, and flood control. We must also recognize the special needs of
particular regions of the country in evaluating the need for additional
projects.

ADDRESSING GLOBAL RESOURCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS

The Global 2000 Report to the President, prepared in response to my 1977
Environment Message, is the first of its kind. Never before has our
government, or any government, taken such a comprehensive, long-range look
at the interrelated global issues of resources, population, and
environment.

The Report's conclusions are important. They point to a rapid increase in
population and human needs through the year 2000 while at the same time a
decline in the earth's capacity to meet those needs, unless nations of the
world act decisively to alter current trends.

The United States has contributed actively to a series of U.N. conferences
on the environment, population, and resources, and is preparing for
the 1981 Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. Following my
1977 Environmental Message, the Administration development assistance
programs have added emphasis to natural resource management and
environmental protection. My 1979 Environmental Message called attention to
the alarming loss of world forests, particularly in the tropics. An
interagency task force on tropical forests has developed a U.S. government
program to encourage conservation and wise management of tropical forests.
The Administration is encouraging action by other nations and world
organizations to the same purpose. The United States is a world leader in
wildlife conservation and the assessment of environmental effects of
government actions. The January 5, 1979, Executive Order directing U.S.
government agencies to consider the effects of their major actions abroad,
is another example of this leadership.

COMMITMENT TO CONTROL OF POLLUTION AND HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS

Over the past four years, there has been steady progress towards cleaner
air and water, sustained by the commitment of Congress and the
Administration to these important national objectives. In addition, the
Administration has developed several new pollution compliance approaches
such as alternative and innovative waste water treatment projects, the
"bubble" concept, the "offset" policy, and permit consolidation, all of
which are designed to reduce regulatory burdens on the private sector.

One of the most pressing problems to come to light in the past four years
has been improper hazardous waste disposal. The Administration has moved on
three fronts. First, we proposed the Oil Hazardous Substances and Hazardous
Waste Response, Liability and Compensation Act (the Superfund bill) to
provide comprehensive authority and $1.6 billion in funds to clean up
abandoned hazardous waste disposal sites. In November 1980 the Congress
passed a Superfund bill which I signed into law.

Second, the administration established a hazardous waste enforcement strike
force to ensure that when available, responsible parties are required to
clean up sites posing dangers to public health and to the environment. To
date, 50 lawsuits have been brought by the strike force.

Third, regulations implementing subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act were issued. The regulations establish comprehensive controls
for hazardous waste and, together with vigorous enforcement, will help to
ensure that Love Canal will not be repeated.

THE FUTURE

For the future, we cannot, and we must not, forget that we are charged with
the stewardship of an irreplaceable environment and natural heritage. Our
children, and our children's children, are dependent upon our maintaining
our commitment to preserving and enhancing the quality of our environment.
It is my hope that when our descendants look back on the 1980's they will
be able to affirm:

--that we kept our commitment to the restoration of environmental
quality;

--that we protected the public health from the continuing dangers of toxic
chemicals, from pollution, from hazardous and radioactive waste, and that
we made our communities safer, healthier and better places to live;

--that we preserved America's wilderness areas and particularly its last
great frontier, Alaska, for the benefit of all Americans in perpetuity;

--that we put this nation on a path to a sustainable energy future, one
based increasingly on renewable resources and on energy conservation;

--that we moved to protect America's countryside and coastland from
mismanagement and irresponsibility;

--that we redirected the management of the nation's water resources toward
water conservation, sound development and environmental protection;

--that we faced squarely such worldwide problems as the destruction of
forests, acid rain, carbon dioxide build-up and nuclear proliferation; and

--that we protected the habitat and the existence of our own species on
this earth.

AGRICULTURE THE FARM ECONOMY

The farm economy is sound and its future is bright. Agriculture remains a
major bulwark of the nation's economy and an even more important factor in
the world food system. The demand for America's agricultural abundance,
here and abroad, continues to grow. In the near-term, the strength of this
demand is expected to press hard against supplies, resulting in continued
price strength.

The health and vitality of current-day agriculture represents a significant
departure from the situation that existed when I came to office four years
ago. In January 1977, the farm economy was in serious trouble. Farm prices
and farm income were falling rapidly. Grain prices were at their lowest
levels in years and steadily falling. Livestock producers, in their fourth
straight year of record losses, were liquidating breeding herds at an
unparalleled rate. Dairy farmers were losing money on every hundredweight
of milk they produced. Sugar prices were in a nosedive.

Through a combination of improvements in old, established programs and the
adoption of new approaches where innovation and change were needed, my
Administration turned this situation around. Commodity prices have steadily
risen. Farm income turned upward. U.S. farm exports set new records each
year, increasing over 80 percent for the four year period. Livestock
producers began rebuilding their herds. Dairy farmers began to earn a
profit again.

RECENT POLICY INITIATIVES

Several major agricultural policy initiatives have been undertaken over the
past year. Some are the culmination of policy proposals made earlier in
this Administration; others are measures taken to help farmers offset the
impact of rapid inflation in production costs. In combination, they
represent a significant strengthening of our nation's food and agricultural
policy. These initiatives include:

FOOD SECURITY RESERVE

The Congress authorized formation of a 4 million ton food grain reserve for
use in international food assistance. This reserve makes it possible for
the United States to stand behind its food aid commitment to food deficit
nations, even during periods of short supplies and high prices. This
corrects a serious fault in our past food assistance policy.

COMPREHENSIVE CROP INSURANCE

The Congress also authorized a significant new crop insurance program
during 1980. This measure provides farmers with an important new program
tool for sharing the economic risks that are inherent to agriculture. When
fully operational, it will replace a hodgepodge of disaster programs that
suffered from numerous shortcomings.

SPECIAL LOAN RATES

Another legislative measure passed late in the 2nd session of the 96th
Congress authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to provide higher loan
rates to farmers who enter their grain in the farmer-owned grain reserve.
This additional incentive to participate will further strengthen the
reserve.

INCREASED LOAN PRICES

In July 1980, I administratively raised loan prices for wheat, feedgrains,
and soybeans to help offset the effects of a serious cost-price squeeze. At
the same time, the release and call prices for the grain reserve were
adjusted upward.

HIGHER TARGET PRICES

The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1980 raised the target prices for
1980-crop wheat and feed grain crops. This change corrected for
shortcomings in the adjustment formula contained in the Food and
Agriculture Act of 1977.

FUTURE AGENDA

The food and agricultural policies adopted by this Administration over the
past four years, including those described above, will provide a firm
foundation for future governmental actions in this field. Expiration of the
Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 later this year will require early
attention by the Congress. With relatively minor changes, most of the
authorities contained in the 1977 Act should be extended in their present
form. The farmer-owned grain reserve has proven to be a particularly
effective means of stabilizing grain markets and should be preserved in
essentially its present form.

Beyond this, it will be important for the Congress to keep a close eye on
price-cost developments in the farm sector. As noted above, some of the
actions I took last year were for the purpose of providing relief from the
cost-price squeeze facing farmers. Should these pressures continue, further
actions might be required.

My Administration has devoted particular attention to the issues of world
hunger, agricultural land use, and the future structure of American
agriculture. I encourage the Congress and the next Administration to review
the results of these landmark enquiries and, where deemed appropriate, to
act on their recommendations.

Following a careful review of the situation, I recently extended the
suspension of grain sales to the Soviet Union. I am satisfied that this
action has served its purpose effectively and fairly. However, as long as
this suspension must remain in effect, it will be important for the next
Administration and the Congress to take whatever actions are necessary to
ensure that the burden does not fall unfairly on our Nation's farmers. This
has been a key feature of my Administration's policy, and it should be
maintained.

VII. FOREIGN POLICY

From the time I assumed office four years ago this month, I have stressed
the need for this country to assert a leading role in a world undergoing
the most extensive and intensive change in human history.

My policies have been directed in particular at three areas of change:

--the steady growth and increased projection abroad of Soviet military
power, power that has grown faster than our own over the past two decades.

--the overwhelming dependence of Western nations, which now increasingly
includes the United States, on vital oil supplies from the Middle East.

--the pressures of change in many nations of the developing world, in Iran
and uncertainty about the future stability of many developing countries.

As a result of those fundamental facts, we face some of the most serious
challenges in the history of this nation. The Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan is a threat to global peace, to East-West relations, and to
regional stable flow of oil. As the unprecedented relations, an and
overwhelming vote in the General Assembly demonstrated, countries across
the world, and particularly the nonaligned, regard the Soviet invasion as a
threat to their independence and security. Turmoil within the region
adjacent to the Persian Gulf poses risks for the security and prosperity of
every oil importing nation and thus for the entire global economy. The
continuing holding of American hostages in Iran is both an affront to
civilized people everywhere, and a serious impediment to meeting the
self-evident threat to widely-shared common interests, including those of
Iran.

But as we focus our most urgent efforts on pressing problems, we will
continue to pursue the benefits that only change can bring. For it always
has been the essence of America that we want to move on, we understand that
prosperity, progress and most of all peace cannot be had by standing still.
A world of nations striving to preserve their independence, and of peoples
aspiring for economic development and political freedom, is not a world
hostile to the ideals and interests of the United States. We face powerful
adversaries, but we have strong friends and dependable allies. We have
common interests with the vast majority of the world's nations and
peoples.

There have been encouraging developments in recent years, as well as
matters requiring continued vigilance and concern:

--Our alliances with the world's most advanced and democratic states from
Western Europe through Japan are stronger than ever.

--We have helped to bring about a dramatic improvement in relations
between Egypt and Israel and an historic step towards a comprehensive
Arab-Israeli settlement.

--Our relations with China are growing closer, providing a major new
dimension in our policy in Asia and the world.

--Across southern Africa from Rhodesia to Namibia we are helping with the
peaceful transition to majority rule in a context of respect for minority
as well as majority rights.

--We have worked domestically and with our allies to respond to an
uncertain energy situation by conservation and diversification of energy
supplies based on internationally agreed targets.

--We have unambiguously demonstrated our commitment to defend Western
interests in Southwest Asia, and we have significantly increased our
ability to do so.

--And over the past four years the U.S. has developed an energy program
which is comprehensive and ambitious. New institutions have been
established such as the Synthetic Fuels Corporation and Solar Bank. Price
decontrol for oil and gas is proceeding. American consumers have risen to
the challenge, and we have experienced real improvements in consumption
patterns.

The central challenge for us today is to our steadfastedness of purpose. We
are no longer tempted by isolationism. But we must also learn to deal
effectively with the contradictions of the world, the need to cooperate
with potential adversaries without euphoria, without undermining our
determination to compete with such adversaries and if necessary confront
the threats they may pose to our security.

We face a broad range of threats and opportunities. We have and should
continue to pursue a broad range of defense, diplomatic and economic
capabilities and objectives.

I see six basic goals for America in the world over the 1980's:

--First, we will continue, as we have over the past four years, to build
America's military strength and that of our allies and friends. Neither the
Soviet Union nor any other nation will have reason to question our will to
sustain the strongest and most flexible defense forces.

--Second, we will pursue an active diplomacy in the world, working,
together with our friends and allies, to resolve disputes through peaceful
means and to make any aggressor pay a heavy price.

--Third, we will strive to resolve pressing international economic
problems, particularly energy and inflation, and continue to pursue our
still larger objective of global economic growth through expanded trade and
development assistance and through the preservation of an open multilateral
trading system.

--Fourth, we will continue vigorously to support the process of building
democratic institutions and improving human rights protection around the
world. We are deeply convinced that the future lies not with dictatorship
but democracy.

--Fifth, we remain deeply committed to the process of mutual and
verifiable arms control, particularly to the effort to prevent the spread
and further development of nuclear weapons. Our decision to defer, but not
abandon our efforts to secure ratification of the SALT II Treaty reflects
our firm conviction that the United States has a profound national
security interest in the constraints on Soviet nuclear forces which only
that treaty can provide.

--Sixth, we must continue to look ahead in order to evaluate and respond
to resource, environment and population challenges through the end of this
century.

One very immediate and pressing objective that is uppermost on our minds
and those of the American people is the release of our hostages in Iran.

We have no basic quarrel with the nation, the revolution or the people
of Iran. The threat to them comes not from American policy but from Soviet
actions in the region. We are prepared to work with the government of Iran
to develop a new and mutually beneficial relationship.

But that will not be possible so long as Iran continues to hold Americans
hostages, in defiance of the world community and civilized behavior. They
must be released unharmed. We have thus far pursued a measured program of
peaceful diplomatic and economic steps in an attempt to resolve this issue
without resorting to other remedies available to us under international
law. This reflects the deep respect of our nation for the rule of law and
for the safety of our people being held, and our belief that a great power
bears a responsibility to use its strength in a measured and judicious
manner. But our patience is not unlimited and our concern for the
well-being of our fellow citizens grows each day.

ENHANCING NATIONAL SECURITY, AMERICAN MILITARY STRENGTH

The maintenance of national security is my first concern, as it has been
for every president before me.

We must have both the military power and the political will to deter our
adversaries and to support our friends and allies.

We must pay whatever price is required to remain the strongest nation in
the world. That price has increased as the military power of our major
adversary has grown and its readiness to use that power been made all too
evident in Afghanistan. The real increases in defense spending, therefore
probably will be higher than previously projected; protecting our security
may require a larger share of our national wealth in the future.

THE U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONSHIP

We are demonstrating to the Soviet Union across a broad front that it will
pay a heavy price for its aggression in terms of our relationship.
Throughout the last decades U.S.-Soviet relations have been a mixture of
cooperation and competition. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the
imposition of a puppet government have highlighted in the starkest terms
the darker side of their policies, going well beyond competition and the
legitimate pursuit of national interest, and violating all norms of
international law and practice.

This attempt to subjugate an independent, non-aligned Islamic people is a
callous violation of international law and the United Nations Charter, two
fundamentals of international order. Hence, it is also a dangerous threat
to world peace. For the first time since the communization of Eastern
Europe after World War II, the Soviets have sent combat forces into an area
that was not previously under their control, into a non-aligned and
sovereign state.

The destruction of the independence of the Afghanistan government and the
occupation by the Soviet Union have altered the strategic situation in that
part of the world in a very ominous fashion. It has significantly shortened
the striking distance to the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf for the
Soviet Union.

It has also eliminated a buffer between the Soviet Union and Pakistan and
presented a new threat to Iran. These two countries are now far more
vulnerable to Soviet political intimidation. If that intimidation were to
prove effective, the Soviet Union could control an area of vital strategic
and economic significance to the survival of Western Europe, the Far East,
and ultimately the United States.

It has now been over a year since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan dealt
a major blow to U.S.-Soviet relations and the entire international system.
The U.S. response has proven to be serious and far-reaching. It has been
increasingly effective, imposing real and sustained costs on the U.S.S.R.'s
economy and international image.

Meanwhile, we have encouraged and supported efforts to reach a political
settlement in Afghanistan which would lead to a withdrawal of Soviet forces
from that country and meet the interests of all concerned. It is Soviet
intransigence that has kept those efforts from bearing fruit.

Meanwhile, an overwhelming November resolution of the United Nations
General Assembly on Afghanistan has again made clear that the world has not
and will not forget Afghanistan. And our response continues to make it
clear that Soviet use of force in pursuit of its international objectives
is incompatible with the notion of business-as-usual.

BILATERAL COMMUNICATION

U.S.-Soviet relations remain strained by the continued Soviet presence in
Afghanistan, by growing Soviet military capabilities, and by the Soviets'
apparent willingness to use those capabilities without respect for the most
basic norms of international behavior.

But the U.S.-Soviet relationship remains the single most important element
in determining whether there will be war or peace. And so, despite serious
strains in our relations, we have maintained a dialogue with the Soviet
Union over the past year. Through this dialogue, we have ensured against
bilateral misunderstandings and miscalculations which might escalate out of
control, and have managed to avoid the injection of superpower rivalries
into areas of tension like the Iran-Iraq conflict.

POLAND

Now, as was the case a year ago, the prospect of Soviet use of force
threatens the international order. The Soviet Union has completed
preparations for a possible military intervention against Poland. Although
the situation in Poland has shown signs of stabilizing recently, Soviet
forces remain in a high state of readiness and they could move into Poland
on short notice. We continue to believe that the Polish people should be
allowed to work out their internal problems themselves, without outside
interference, and we have made clear to the Soviet leadership that any
intervention in Poland would have severe and prolonged consequences for
East-West detente, and U.S.-Soviet relations in particular.

DEFENSE BUDGET

For many years the Soviets have steadily increased their real defense
spending, expanded their strategic forces, strengthened their forces in
Europe and Asia, and enhanced their capability for projecting military
force around the world directly or through the use of proxies. Afghanistan
dramatizes the vastly increased military power of the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Union has built a war machine far beyond any reasonable
requirements for their own defense and security. In contrast, our own
defense spending declined in real terms every year from 1968 through 1976.

We have reversed this decline in our own effort. Every year since 1976
there has been a real increase in our defense spending, and our lead has
encouraged increases by our allies. With the support of the Congress, we
must and will make an even greater effort in the years ahead.

The Fiscal Year 1982 budget would increase funding authority for defense to
more than $196 billion. This amount, together with a supplemental request
for FY 1981 of about $6 billion, will more than meet my Administration's
pledge for a sustained growth of 3 percent in real expenditures, and
provides for 5 percent in program growth in FY 1982 and beyond.

The trends we mean to correct cannot be remedied overnight; we must be
willing to see this program through. To ensure that we do so I am setting a
growth rate for defense that we can sustain over the long haul.

The defense program I have proposed for the next five years will require
some sacrifice, but sacrifice we can well afford.

The defense program emphasizes four areas:

1. It ensures that our strategic nuclear forces will be equivalent to those
of the Soviet Union and that deterrence against nuclear war will be
maintained; 2. It upgrades our forces so that the military balance between
NATO and the Warsaw Pact will continue to deter the outbreak of war,
conventional or nuclear, in Europe; 3. It provides us the ability to come
quickly to the aid of friends and allies around the globe; 4. And it ensures
that our Navy will continue to be the most powerful on the seas.

STRATEGIC FORCES

We are strengthening each of the three legs of our strategic forces. The
cruise missile production which will begin next year will modernize our
strategic air deterrent. B-52 capabilities will also be improved. These
steps will maintain and enhance the B-52 fleet by improving its ability to
deliver weapons against increasingly heavily defended targets.

We are also modernizing our strategic submarine force. Four more POSEIDON
submarines backfitted with new, 4,000 mile TRIDENT I missiles began
deployments in 1980. Nine TRIDENT submarines have been authorized through
1981, and we propose one more each year.

The new M-X missile program to enhance our land-based intercontinental
ballistic missile force continues to make progress. Technical refinements
in the basing design over the last year will result in operational
benefits, lower costs, and reduced environmental impact. The M-X program
continues to be an essential ingredient in our strategic posture, providing
survivability, endurance, secure command and control and the capability to
threaten targets the Soviets hold dear.

Our new systems will enable U.S. strategic forces to maintain equivalence
in the face of the mounting Soviet challenge. We would however need an even
greater investment in strategic systems to meet the likely Soviet buildup
without SALT.

STRATEGIC DOCTRINE

This Administration's systematic contributions to the necessary evolution
of strategic doctrine began in 1977 when I commissioned a comprehensive net
assessment. From that base a number of thorough investigations of specific
topics continued. I should emphasize that the need for an evolutionary
doctrine is driven not by any change in our basic objective, which remains
peace and freedom for all mankind. Rather, the need for change is driven by
the inexorable buildup of Soviet military power and the increasing
propensity of Soviet leaders to use this power in coercion and outright
aggression to impose their will on others.

I have codified our evolving strategic doctrine in a number of interrelated
and mutually supporting Presidential Directives. Their overarching theme is
to provide a doctrinal basis, and the specific program to implement it,
that tells the world that no potential adversary of the United States could
ever conclude that the fruits of his aggression would be significant or
worth the enormous costs of our retaliation.

The Presidential Directives include:

PD-18: An overview of our strategic objectives PD-37: Basic space policy
PD-41: Civil Defense PD-53: Survivability and endurance for
telecommunications PD-57: Mobilization planning PD-58: Continuity of
Government PD-59: Countervailing Strategy for General War.

These policies have been devised to deter, first and foremost, Soviet
aggression. As such they confront not only Soviet military forces but also
Soviet military doctrine. By definition deterrence requires that we shape
Soviet assessments about the risks of war, assessments they will make using
their doctrine, not ours.

But at the same time we in no way seek to emulate their doctrine. In
particular, nothing in our policy contemplates that nuclear warfare could
ever be a deliberate instrument for achieving our own goals of peace and
freedom. Moreover, our policies are carefully devised to provide the
greatest possible incentives and opportunities for future progress in arms
control.

Finally, our doctrinal evolution has been undertaken with appropriate
consultation with our NATO Allies and others. We are fully consistent with
NATO's strategy of flexible response.

FORCES FOR NATO

We are greatly accelerating our ability to reinforce Western Europe with
massive ground and air forces in a crisis. We are undertaking a major
modernization program for the Army's weapons and equipment, adding armor,
firepower, and tactical mobility.

We are prepositioning more heavy equipment in Europe to help us cope with
attacks with little warning, and greatly strengthening our airlift and
sealift capabilities.

We are also improving our tactical air forces, buying about 1700 new
fighter and attack aircraft over the next five years, and increasing the
number of Air Force fighter wings by over 10 percent.

We are working closely with our European allies to secure the Host Nation
Support necessary to enable us to deploy more quickly a greater ratio of
combat forces to the European theater at a lower cost to the United
States.

SECURITY ASSISTANCE

As we move to enhance U.S. defense capabilities, we must not lose sight of
the need to assist others in maintaining their own security and
independence. Events since World War II, most recently in Southwest Asia,
have amply demonstrated that U.S. security cannot exist in a vacuum, and
that our own prospects for peace are closely tied to those of our friends.
The security assistance programs which I am proposing for the coming fiscal
year thus directly promote vital U.S. foreign policy and national security
aims, and are integral parts of our efforts to improve and upgrade our own
military forces.

More specifically, these programs, which are part of our overall foreign
aid request, promote U.S. security in two principal ways. First, they
assist friendly and allied nations to develop the capability to defend
themselves and maintain their own independence. An example during this past
year was the timely support provided Thailand to help bolster that
country's defenses against the large numbers of Soviet-backed Vietnamese
troops ranged along its eastern frontier. In addition, over the years these
programs have been important to the continued independence of other friends
and allies such as Israel, Greece, Turkey and Korea. Second, security
assistance constitutes an essential element in the broad cooperative
relationships we have established with many nations which permit either
U.S. bases on their territory or access by U.S. forces to their facilities.
These programs have been particularly important with regard to the
recently-concluded access agreements with various countries in the Persian
Gulf and Indian Ocean regions and have been crucial to the protection of
our interests throughout Southwest Asia.

RAPID DEPLOYMENT FORCES

We are systematically enhancing our ability to respond rapidly to non-NATO
contingencies wherever required by our commitments or when our vital
interests are threatened.

The rapid deployment forces we are assembling will be extraordinarily
flexible: They could range in size from a few ships or air squadrons to
formations as large as 100,000 men, together with their support. Our forces
will be prepared for rapid deployment to any region of strategic
significance.

Among the specific initiatives we are taking to help us respond to crises
outside of Europe are:

The development of a new fleet of large cargo aircraft with
intercontinental range; the design and procurement of a force of Maritime
Prepositioning Ships that will carry heavy equipment and supplies for three
Marine Corps brigades; the procurement of fast sealift ships to move large
quantities of men and material quickly from the U.S. to overseas areas of
deployment; increasing training and exercise activities to ensure that our
forces will be well prepared to deploy and operate in distant areas.

In addition, our European allies have agreed on the importance of providing
support to U.S. deployments to Southwest Asia.

NAVAL FORCES

Seapower is indispensable to our global position, in peace and also in war.
Our shipbuilding program will sustain a 550-ship Navy in the 1990's and we
will continue to build the most capable ships afloat.

The program I have proposed will assure the ability of our Navy to operate
in high threat areas, to maintain control of the seas and protect vital
lines of communication, both military and economic and to provide the
strong maritime component of our rapid deployment forces. This is essential
for operations in remote areas of the world, where we cannot predict far in
advance the precise location of trouble, or preposition equipment on land.

MILITARY PERSONNEL

No matter how capable or advanced our weapons systems, our military
security depends on the abilities, the training and the dedication of the
people who serve in our armed forces. I am determined to recruit and to
retain under any foreseeable circumstances an ample level of such skilled
and experienced military personnel. This Administration has supported for
FY 1981 the largest peacetime increase ever in military pay and
allowances.

We have enhanced our readiness and combat endurance by improving the
Reserve Components. All reservists are assigned to units structured to
complement and provide needed depth to our active forces. Some reserve
personnel have also now been equipped with new equipment.

MOBILIZATION PLANNING

We have completed our first phase of mobilization planning, the first such
Presidentially-directed effort since World War II. The government-wide
exercise of our mobilization plans at the end of 1980 showed, first, that
planning pays off and, second, that much more needs to be done.

OUR INTELLIGENCE POSTURE

Our national interests are critically dependent on a strong and effective
intelligence capability. We will maintain and strengthen the intelligence
capabilities needed to assure our national security. Maintenance of and
continued improvements in our multi-faceted intelligence effort are
essential if we are to cope successfully with the turbulence and
uncertainties of today's world.

The intelligence budget I have submitted to the Congress responds to our
needs in a responsible way, providing for significant growth over the
Fiscal Year 1981 budget. This growth will enable us to develop new
technical means of intelligence collection while also assuring that the
more traditional methods of intelligence work are also given proper stress.
We must continue to integrate both modes of collection in our analyses.

REGIONAL POLICIES

Every President for over three decades has recognized that America's
interests are global and that we must pursue a global foreign policy.

Two world wars have made clear our stake in Western Europe and the North
Atlantic area. We are also inextricably linked with the Far East,
politically, economically, and militarily. In both of these, the United
States has a permanent presence and security commitments which would be
automatically triggered. We have become increasingly conscious of our
growing interests in a third area, the Middle East and the Persian Gulf
area.

We have vital stakes in other major regions of the world as well. We have
long recognized that in an era of interdependence, our own security and
prosperity depend upon a larger common effort with friends and allies
throughout the world.

THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE

In recognition of the threat which the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan posed
to Western interests in both Europe and Southwest Asia, NATO foreign and
defense ministers have expressed full support for U.S. efforts to develop a
capability to respond to a contingency in Southwest Asia and have approved
an extensive program to help fill the gap which could be created by the
diversion of U.S. forces to that region.

The U.S. has not been alone in seeking to maintain stability in the
Southwest Asia area and insure access to the needed resources there. The
European nations with the capability to do so are improving their own
forces in the region and providing greater economic and political support
to the residents of the area. In the face of the potential danger posed by
the Iran-Iraq conflict, we have developed coordination among the Western
forces in the area of the Persian Gulf in order to be able to safeguard
passage in that essential waterway.

Concerning developments in and around Poland the allies have achieved the
highest level of cohesion and unity of purpose in making clear the effects
on future East-West relations of a precipitous Soviet act there.

The alliance has continued to build on the progress of the past three years
in improving its conventional forces through the Long-Term Defense Program.
Though economic conditions throughout Europe today are making its
achievement difficult, the yearly real increase of 3 percent in defense
spending remains a goal actively sought by the alliance.

The NATO alliance also has moved forward during the past year with the
implementation of its historic December 1979 decision to modernize its
Theater Nuclear Force capabilities through deployment of improved Pershing
ballistic missiles and ground-launched cruise missiles in Europe. Our
allies continue to cooperate actively with us in this important joint
endeavor, whose purpose is to demonstrate convincingly to the Soviet Union
the potential costs of a nuclear conflict in Europe. At the same time, we
offered convincing evidence of our commitment to arms control in Europe by
initiating preliminary consultations with the Soviet Union in Geneva on the
subject of negotiated limits on long-range theater nuclear forces. Also,
during 1980 we initiated and carried out a withdrawal from our nuclear
weapons stockpile in Europe of 1,000 nuclear warheads. This successful
drawdown in our nuclear stockpile was a further tangible demonstration of
our commitment to the updating of our existing theater nuclear forces in
Europe.

In the NATO area, we continued to work closely with other countries in
providing resources to help Turkey regain economic health. We regretted
that massive political and internal security problems led the Turkish
military to take over the government on September 12. The new Turkish
authorities are making some progress in resolving those problems, and they
have pledged an early return to civilian government. The tradition of the
Turkish military gives us cause to take that pledge seriously. We welcomed
the reestablishment of Greece's links to the integrated military command
structure of the Atlantic Alliance--a move which we had strongly
encouraged--as a major step toward strengthening NATO's vital southern
flank at a time of international crisis and tension in adjacent areas.
Greek reintegration exemplifies the importance which the allies place on
cooperating in the common defense and shows that the allies can make the
difficult decisions necessary to insure their continued security. We also
welcomed the resumption of the intercommunal talks on Cyprus.

THE U.S. AND THE PACIFIC NATIONS

The United States is a Pacific nation, as much as it is an Atlantic nation.
Our interests in Asia are as important to us as our interests in Europe.
Our trade with Asia is as great as our trade with Europe. During the past
four years we have regained a strong, dynamic and flexible posture for the
United States in this vital region.

Our major alliances with Japan, Australia and New Zealand are now stronger
than they ever have been, and together with the nations of western Europe,
we have begun to form the basic political structure for dealing with
international crises that affect us all. Japan, Australia and New Zealand
have given us strong support in developing a strategy for responding to
instability in the Persian Gulf.

Normalization of U.S. relations with China has facilitated China's full
entry into the international community and encouraged a constructive
Chinese role in the Asia-Pacific region. Our relations with China have been
rapidly consolidated over the past year through the conclusion of a series
of bilateral agreements. We have established a pattern of frequent and
frank consultations between our two governments, exemplified by a series of
high-level visits and by regular exchanges at the working level, through
which we have been able to identify increasingly broad areas of common
interest on which we can cooperate.

United States relations with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) have also expanded dramatically in the past four years. ASEAN is
now the focus for U.S. policy in Southeast Asia, and its cohesion and
strength are essential to stability in this critical area and beyond.

Soviet-supported Vietnamese aggression in Indo-china has posed a major
challenge to regional stability. In response, we have reiterated our
security commitment to Thailand and have provided emergency security
assistance for Thai forces facing a Vietnamese military threat along the
Thai-Cambodian border. We have worked closely with ASEAN and the U.N. to
press for withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia and to encourage a
political settlement in Cambodia which permits that nation to be governed
by leaders of its own choice. We still look forward to the day when
Cambodia peacefully can begin the process of rebuilding its social,
economic and political institutions, after years of devastation and
occupation. And, on humanitarian grounds and in support of our friends in
the region, we have worked vigorously with international organizations to
arrange relief and resettlement for the exodus of Indo-chinese refugees
which threatened to overwhelm these nations.

We have maintained our alliance with Korea and helped assure Korea's
security during a difficult period of political transition.

We have amended our military base agreement with the Philippines, ensuring
stable access to these bases through 1991. The importance of our Philippine
bases to the strategic flexibility of U.S. forces and our access to the
Indian Ocean is self-evident.

Finally, we are in the process of concluding a long negotiation
establishing Micronesia's status as a freely associated state.

We enter the 1980's with a firm strategic footing in East Asia and the
Pacific, based on stable and productive U.S. relations with the majority of
countries of the region. We have established a stable level of U.S.
involvement in the region, appropriate to our own interests and to the
interests of our friends and allies there.

THE MIDDLE EAST AND SOUTHWEST ASIA

The continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the dislocations caused
by the Iraq-Iran war serve as constant reminders of the critical importance
for us, and our allies, of a third strategic zone stretching across the
Middle East, the Persian Gulf, and much of the Indian subcontinent. This
Southwest Asian region has served as a key strategic and commercial link
between East and West over the centuries. Today it produces two-thirds of
the world's oil exports, providing most of the energy needs of our European
allies and Japan. It has experienced almost continuous conflict between
nations, internal instabilities in many countries, and regional rivalries,
combined with very rapid economic and social change. And now the Soviet
Union remains in occupation of one of these nations, ignoring world opinion
which has called on it to get out.

We have taken several measures to meet these challenges.

MIDDLE EAST

In the Middle East, our determination to consolidate what has already been
achieved in the peace process--and to buttress that accomplishment with
further progress toward a comprehensive peace settlement--must remain a
central goal of our foreign policy. Pursuant to their peace treaty, Egypt
and Israel have made steady progress in the normalization of their
relations in a variety of fields, bringing the benefits of peace directly
to their people. The new relationship between Egypt and Israel stands as an
example of peaceful cooperation in an increasingly fragmented and turbulent
region.

Both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin remain committed to the
current negotiations to provide full autonomy to the inhabitants of the
West Bank and Gaza. These negotiations have been complex and difficult, but
they have already made significant progress, and it is vital that the two
sides, with our assistance, see the process through to a successful
conclusion. We also recognize the need to broaden the peace process to
include other parties to the conflict and believe that a successful
autonomy agreement is an essential first step toward this objective.

We have also taken a number of steps to strengthen our bilateral relations
with both Israel and Egypt. We share important strategic interests with
both of these countries.

We remain committed to Israel's security and are prepared to take concrete
steps to support Israel whenever that security is threatened.

PERSIAN GULF

The Persian Gulf has been a vital crossroads for trade between Europe and
Asia at many key moments in history. It has become essential in recent
years for its supply of oil to the United States, our allies, and our
friends. We have taken effective measures to control our own consumption of
imported fuel, working in cooperation with the other key industrial /
nations of the world. However, there is little doubt that the healthy
growth of our American and world economies will depend for many years on
continued safe access to the Persian Gulf's oil production. The denial of
these oil supplies would threaten not only our own but world security.

The potent new threat from an advancing Soviet Union, against the
background of regional instability of which it can take advantage, requires
that we reinforce our ability to defend our regional friends and to protect
the flow of oil. We are continuing to build on the strong political,
economic, social and humanitarian ties which bind this government and the
American people to friendly governments and peoples of the Persian Gulf.

We have also embarked on a course to reinforce the trust and confidence our
regional friends have in our ability to come to their assistance rapidly
with American military force if needed. We have increased our naval
presence in the Indian Ocean. We have created a Rapid Deployment Force
which can move quickly to the Gulf--or indeed any other area of the world
where outside aggression threatens. We have concluded several agreements
with countries which are prepared to let us use their airports and naval
facilities in an emergency. We have met requests for reasonable amounts of
American weaponry from regional countries which are anxious to defend
themselves. And we are discussing with a number of our area friends further
ways we can help to improve their security and ours, both for the short and
the longer term.

SOUTH ASIA

We seek a South Asia comprising sovereign and stable states, free of
outside interference, which can strengthen their political institutions
according to their own national genius and can develop their economies for
the betterment of their people.

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has posed a new challenge to this
region, and particularly to neighboring Pakistan. We are engaged in a
continuing dialogue with the Pakistan government concerning its development
and security requirements and the economic burden imposed by Afghan
refugees who have fled to Pakistan. We are participating with other aid
consortium members in debt rescheduling and will continue to cooperate
through the UNHCR in providing refugee assistance. We remain committed to
Pakistan's territorial integrity and independence.

Developments in the broad South/Southwest Asian region have also lent a new
importance to our relations with India, the largest and strongest power in
the area. We share India's interest in a more constructive relationship.
Indian policies and perceptions at times differ from our own, and we have
established a candid dialogue with this sister democracy which seeks to
avoid the misunderstandings which have sometimes complicated our ties.

We attach major importance to strong economic assistance programs to the
countries in the area, which include a majority of the poor of the
non-Communist world. We believe that these programs will help achieve
stability in the area, an objective we share with the countries in the
region. Great progress has been achieved by these countries in increasing
food production; international cooperation in harnessing the great river
resources of South Asia would contribute further to this goal and help to
increase energy production.

We continue to give high priority to our non-proliferation goals in the
area in the context of our broad global and regional priorities. The
decision to continue supply of nuclear fuel to the Indian Tarapur reactors
was sensitive to this effort.

AFRICA

The United States has achieved a new level of trust and cooperation with
Africa. Our efforts, together with our allies, to achieve peace in southern
Africa, our increased efforts to help the poorest countries in Africa to
combat poverty, and our expanded efforts to promote trade and investment
have led to growing respect for the U.S. and to cooperation in areas of
vital interest to the United States.

Africa is a continent of poor nations for the most part. It also contains
many of the mineral resources vital for our economy. We have worked with
Africa in a spirit of mutual cooperation to help the African nations solve
their problems of poverty and to develop stronger ties between our private
sector and African economies. Our assistance to Africa has more than
doubled in the last four years. Equally important, we set in motion new
mechanisms for private investment and trade.

Nigeria is the largest country in Black Africa and the second largest oil
supplier to the United States. During this Administration we have greatly
expanded and improved our relationship with Nigeria and other West African
states whose aspirations for a constitutional democratic order we share and
support. This interest was manifested both symbolically and practically by
the visit of Vice President Mondale to West Africa in July (1980) and the
successful visit to Washington of the President of Nigeria in October.

During Vice President Mondale's visit, a Joint Agricultural Consultative
Committee was established, with the U.S. represented entirely by the
private sector. This could herald a new role for the American private
sector in helping solve the world's serious food shortages. I am pleased to
say that our relations with Nigeria are at an all-time high, providing the
foundation for an even stronger relationship in the years ahead.

Another tenet of this Administration's approach to African problems has
been encouragement and support for regional solutions to Africa's
problems. We have supported initiatives by the Organization of African
Unity to solve the protracted conflict in the western Sahara, Chad, and the
Horn. In Chad, the world is watching with dismay as a country torn by a
devastating civil war has become a fertile field for Libya's exploitation,
thus demonstrating that threats to peace can come from forces within as
well as without Africa.

In southern Africa the United States continues to pursue a policy of
encouraging peaceful development toward majority rule. In 1980, Southern
Rhodesia became independent as Zimbabwe, a multiracial nation under a
system of majority rule. Zimbabwean independence last April was the
culmination of a long struggle within the country and diplomatic efforts
involving Great Britain, African states neighboring Zimbabwe, and the
United States.

The focus of our efforts in pursuit of majority rule in southern Africa has
now turned to Namibia. Negotiations are proceeding among concerned parties
under the leadership of U.N. Secretary General Waldheim. This should lead
to implementation of the U.N. plan for self-determination and independence
for Namibia during 1981. If these negotiations are successfully concluded,
sixty-five years of uncertainty over the status of the territory, including
a seven-year-long war, will be ended.

In response to our active concern with issues of importance to Africans,
African states have cooperated with us on issues of importance to our
national interests. African states voted overwhelmingly in favor of the
U.N. Resolution calling for release of the hostages, and for the U.N.
Resolution condemning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Two countries of
Africa have signed access agreements with the U.S. allowing us use of naval
and air facilities in the Indian Ocean.

Africans have become increasingly vocal on human rights. African leaders
have spoken out on the issue of political prisoners, and the OAU is
drafting its own Charter on Human Rights. Three countries in Africa--
Nigeria, Ghana, and Uganda--have returned to civilian rule during the past
year.

U.S. cooperation with Africa on all these matters represents a strong base
on which we can build in future years.

Liberia is a country of long-standing ties with the U.S. and the site of
considerable U.S. investment and facilities. This past April a coup
replaced the government and a period of political and economic uncertainty
ensued. The U.S. acted swiftly to meet this situation. We, together with
African leaders, urged the release of political prisoners, and many have
been released; we provided emergency economic assistance to help avoid
economic collapse, and helped to involve the IMF and the banking community
to bring about economic stability; and we have worked closely with the new
leaders to maintain Liberia's strong ties with the West and to protect
America's vital interests.

NORTH AFRICA

In early 1979, following a Libyan-inspired commando attack on a Tunisian
provincial city, the U.S. responded promptly to Tunisia's urgent request
for assistance, both by airlifting needed military equipment and by making
clear our longstanding interest in the security and integrity of this
friendly country. The U.S. remains determined to oppose other irresponsible
Libyan aspirations. Despairing of a productive dialogue with the Libyan
authorities, the U.S. closed down its embassy in Libya and later expelled
six Libyan diplomats in Washington in order to deter an intimidation
campaign against Libyan citizens in the U.S.

U.S. relations with Algeria have improved, and Algeria has played an
indispensable and effective role as intermediary between Iran and the U.S.
over the hostage issue.

The strengthening of our arms supply relationship with Morocco has helped
to deal with attacks inside its internationally recognized frontiers and to
strengthen its confidence in seeking a political settlement of the Western
Sahara conflict. While not assuming a mediatory role, the U.S. encouraged
all interested parties to turn their energies to a peaceful and sensible
compromise resolution of the war in the Sahara and supported efforts by the
Organization of African Unity toward that end. As the year drew to a close,
the U.S. was encouraged by evolution in the attitudes of all sides, and is
hopeful that their differences will be peacefully resolved in the year
ahead so that the vast economic potential of North Africa can be developed
for the well-being of the people living there.

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

The principles of our policies in this hemisphere have been clear and
constant over the last four years. We support democracy and respect for
human rights. We have struggled with many to help free the region of both
repression and terrorism. We have respected ideological diversity and
opposed outside intervention in purely internal affairs. We will act,
though, in response to a request for assistance by a country threatened by
external aggression. We support social and economic development within a
democratic framework. We support the peaceful settlement of disputes. We
strongly encourage regional cooperation and shared responsibilities within
the hemisphere to all these ends, and we have eagerly and regularly sought
the advice of the leaders of the region on a wide range of issues.

Last November, I spoke to the General Assembly of the Organization of
American States of a cause that has been closest to my heart--human
rights. It is an issue that has found its time in the hemisphere. The cause
is not mine alone, but an historic movement that will endure.

At Riobamba, Ecuador, last September four Andean Pact countries, Costa
Rica, and Panama broke new ground by adopting a "Code of Conduct," that
joint action in defense of human rights does not violate the principles of
nonintervention in the internal affairs of states in this hemisphere. The
Organization of American States has twice condemned the coup that
overturned the democratic process in Bolivia and the widespread abuse of
human rights by the regime which seized power. The Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights has gained world acclaim for its dispassionate
reports. It completed two major country studies this year in addition to
its annual report. In a resolution adopted without opposition, the OAS
General Assembly in November strongly supported the work of the Commission.
The American Convention on Human Rights is in force and an Inter-American
Court has been created to judge human rights violations. This convention
has been pending before the Senate for two years; I hope the United States
this year will join the other nations of the hemisphere in ratifying a
convention which embodies principles that are our tradition.

The trend in favor of democracy has continued. During this past year, Peru
inaugurated a democratically elected government. Brazil continues its
process of liberalization. In Central America, Hondurans voted in record
numbers in their first national elections in over eight years. In the
Caribbean seven elections have returned governments firmly committed to the
democratic traditions of the Commonwealth.

Another major contribution to peace in the hemisphere is Latin America's
own Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. On behalf of the United
States, I signed Protocol I of this Treaty in May of 1977 and sent it to
the Senate for ratification. I urge that it be acted upon promptly by the
Senate in order that it be brought into the widest possible effect in the
Latin American region.

Regional cooperation for development is gaining from Central America to the
Andes, and throughout the Caribbean. The Caribbean Group for Cooperation in
Economic Development, which we established with 29 other nations in 1977,
has helped channel $750 million in external support for growth in the
Caribbean. The recent meeting of the Chiefs of State of the Eastern
Caribbean set a new precedent for cooperation in that region. Mexico and
Venezuela jointly and Trinidad and Tobago separately have established oil
facilities that will provide substantial assistance to their oil importing
neighbors. The peace treaty between El Salvador and Honduras will hopefully
stimulate Central America to move forward again toward economic
integration. Formation of Caribbean/ Central American Action, a private
sector organization, has given a major impetus to improving
people-to-people bonds and strengthening the role of private enterprise in
the development of democratic societies.

The Panama treaties have been in force for over a year. A new partnership
has been created with Panama; it is a model for large and small nations. A
longstanding issue that divided us from our neighbors has been resolved.
The security of the canal has been enhanced. The canal is operating as well
as ever, with traffic through it reaching record levels this year. Canal
employees, American and Panamanian alike, have remained on the job and have
found their living and working conditions virtually unchanged.

In 1980, relations with Mexico continued to improve due in large measure to
the effectiveness of the Coordinator for Mexican Affairs and the expanded
use of the U.S.-Mexico Consultative Mechanism. By holding periodic meetings
of its various working groups, we have been able to prevent mutual concerns
from becoming political issues. The Secretary of State visited Mexico City
in November, and, along with the Mexican Secretary of Foreign Relations,
reviewed the performance of the Consultative Mechanism. The office of the
Coordinator has ensured the implementation of my directive to all agencies
to accord high priority to Mexican concerns. Trade with Mexico rose by
almost 60 percent to nearly $30 billion, making that country our third
largest trading partner.

These are all encouraging developments. Other problems remain, however.

The impact of large-scale migration is affecting many countries in the
hemisphere. The most serious manifestation was the massive, illegal exodus
from Cuba last summer. The Cuban government unilaterally encouraged the
disorderly and even deadly migration of 125,000 of its citizens in complete
disregard for international law or the immigration laws of its neighbors.
Migrations of this nature clearly require concerted action, and we have
asked the OAS to explore means of dealing with similar situations which may
occur in the future.

We have a long-standing treaty with Colombia on Quita Sueno, Roncador, and
Serrano which remains to be ratified by the Senate.

In Central America, the future of Nicaragua is unclear. Recent tensions,
the restrictions on the press and political activity, an inordinate Cuban
presence in the country and the tragic killing by the security forces of a
businessman well known for his democratic orientation, cause us
considerable concern. These are not encouraging developments. But those who
seek a free society remain in the contest for their nation's destiny. They
have asked us to help rebuild their country, and by our assistance, to
demonstrate that the democratic nations do not intend to abandon Nicaragua
to the Cubans. As long as those who intend to pursue their pluralistic
goals play important roles in Nicaragua, it deserves our continuing
support.

In El Salvador, we have supported the efforts of the Junta to change the
fundamental basis of an inequitable system and to give a stake in a new
nation to those millions of people, who for so long, lived without hope or
dignity. As the government struggles against those who would restore an old
tyranny or impose a new one, the United States will continue to stand
behind them.

We have increased our aid to the Caribbean, an area vital to our national
security, and we should continue to build close relations based on mutual
respect and understanding, and common interests.

As the nations of this hemisphere prepare to move further into the 1980's,
I am struck by the depth of underlying commitment that there is to our
common principles: non-intervention, peaceful settlement of disputes,
cooperation for development, democracy and defense of basic human rights. I
leave office satisfied that the political, economic, social and
organizational basis for further progress with respect to all these
principles have been substantially strengthened in the past four years. I
am particularly reassured by the leadership by other nations of the
hemisphere in advancing these principles. The success of our common task of
improving the circumstances of all peoples and nations in the hemisphere
can only be assured by the sharing of responsibility. I look forward to a
hemisphere that at the end of this decade has proven itself anew as a
leader in the promotion of both national and human dignity.

THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

A growing defense effort and a vigorous foreign policy rest upon a strong
economy here in the United States. And the strength of our own economy
depends upon our ability to lead and compete in the international
marketplace.

ENERGY

Last year, the war between Iraq and Iran led to the loss of nearly 4
million barrels of oil to world markets, the third major oil market
disruption in the past seven years. This crisis has vividly demonstrated
once again both the value of lessened dependence on oil imports and the
continuing instability of the Persian Gulf area.

Under the leadership of the United States, the 21 members of the
International Energy Agency took collective action to ensure that the oil
shortfall stemming from the Iran-Iraq war would not be aggravated by
competition for scarce spot market supplies. We are also working together
to see that those nations most seriously affected by the oil disruption--
including our key NATO allies Turkey and Portugal--can get the oil they
need. At the most recent IEA Ministerial meeting we joined the other
members in pledging to take those policy measures necessary to slice our
joint oil imports in the first quarter of 1981 by 2.2 million barrels.

Our international cooperation efforts in the energy field are not limited
to crisis management. At the Economic Summit meetings in Tokyo and Venice,
the heads of government of the seven major industrial democracies agreed to
a series of tough energy conservation and production goals. We are working
together with all our allies and friends in this effort.

Construction has begun on a commercial scale coal liquefaction plant in
West Virginia co-financed by the United States, Japan and West Germany. An
interagency task force has just reported to me on a series of measures we
need to take to increase coal production and exports. This report builds on
the work of the International Energy Agency's Coal Industry Advisory Board.
With the assurances of a reliable United States steam coal supply at
reasonable prices, many of the electric power plants to be built in the
1980's and 1990's can be coal-fired rather than oil-burning.

We are working cooperatively with other nations to increase energy security
in other areas as well. Joint research and development with our allies is
underway in solar energy, nuclear power, industrial conservation and other
areas. In addition, we are assisting rapidly industrializing nations to
carefully assess their basic energy policy choices, and our development
assistance program helps the developing countries to increase indigenous
energy production to meet the energy needs of their poorest citizens. We
support the proposal for a new World Bank energy affiliate to these same
ends, whose fulfillment will contribute to a better global balance between
energy supply and demand.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY POLICY

Despite the rapid increase in oil costs, the policy measures we have taken
to improve domestic economic performance have had a continued powerful
effect on our external accounts and on the strength of the dollar. A strong
dollar helps in the fight against inflation.

There has also been considerable forward movement in efforts to improve the
functioning of the international monetary system. The stability of the
international system of payments and trade is important to the stability
and good health of our own economy. We have given strong support to the
innovative steps being taken by the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank to help promote early adjustment to the difficult international
economic problems. Recent agreement to increase quotas by fifty percent
will ensure the IMF has sufficient resources to perform its central role in
promoting adjustment and financing payments imbalances. The World Bank's
new structural adjustment lending program will also make an important
contribution to international efforts to help countries achieve a
sustainable level of growth and development.

SUGAR

In 1980, Congress passed U.S. implementing legislation for the
International Sugar Agreement, thus fulfilling a major commitment of this
Administration. The agreement is an important element in our international
commodity policy with far-reaching implications for our relations with
developing countries, particularly sugar producers in Latin America.
Producers and consumers alike will benefit from a more stable market for
this essential commodity.

COFFEE

At year's end, Congress approved implementing legislation permitting the
U.S. to carry out fully its commitments under International Coffee
Agreement Specifically, the legislation enables us to meet our part of an
understanding negotiated last fall among members of the Agreement, which
defends, by use of export quotas, a price range well below coffee prices of
previous years and which commits major coffee producers to eliminate cartel
arrangements that manipulated future markets to raise prices. The way is
now open to a fully-functioning International Coffee Agreement which can
help to stabilize this major world commodity market. The results will be
positive for both consumers--who will be less likely to suffer from sharp
increases in coffee prices--and producers--who can undertake future
investment with assurance of greater protection against disruptive price
fluctuations in their exports.

NATURAL RUBBER

In 1980, the International Natural Rubber Agreement entered into force
provisionally. U.S. membership in this new body was approved overwhelmingly
by the Senate last year. The natural rubber agreement is a model of its
kind and should make a substantial contribution to a stable world market in
this key industrial commodity. It is thus an excellent example of
constructive steps to improve the operation of the world economy in ways
which can benefit the developing and industrialized countries alike. In
particular, the agreement has improved important U.S. relationships with
the major natural rubber-producing countries of Southeast Asia.

COMMON FUND

The United States joined members of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, both developed and developing nations, in concluding
Articles of Agreement in 1980 for a Common Fund to help international
commodity agreements stabilize the prices of raw materials.

ECONOMIC COOPERATION WITH DEVELOPING NATIONS

Our relations with the developing nations are of major importance to the
United States. The fabric of our relations with these countries has strong
economic and political dimensions. They constitute the most rapidly growing
markets for our exports, and are important sources of fuel and raw
materials. Their political views are increasingly important, as
demonstrated in their overwhelming condemnation of the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. Our ability to work together with developing nations toward
goals we have in common (their political independence, the resolution of
regional tensions, and our growing ties of trade for example) require us to
maintain the policy of active involvement with the developing world that we
have pursued over the past four years.

The actions we have taken in such areas as energy, trade, commodities, and
international financial institutions are all important to the welfare of
the developing countries. Another important way the United States can
directly assist these countries and demonstrate our concern for their
future is through our multilateral and bilateral foreign assistance
program. The legislation which I will be submitting to you for FY 82
provides the authority and the funds to carry on this activity. Prompt
Congressional action on this legislation is essential in order to attack
such high priority global problems as food and energy, meet our treaty and
base rights agreements, continue our peace efforts in the Middle East,
provide economic and development support to countries in need, promote
progress on North-South issues, protect Western interests, and counter
Soviet influence.

Our proposed FY 1982 bilateral development aid program is directly
responsive to the agreement reached at the 1980 Venice Economic Summit that
the major industrial nations should increase their aid for food and energy
production and for family planning. We understand that other Summit
countries plan similar responses. It is also important to honor our
international agreements for multilateral assistance by authorizing and
appropriating funds for the International Financial Institutions. These
multilateral programs enhance the efficiency of U.S. contributions by
combining them with those of many other donor countries to promote
development; the proposed new World Bank affiliate to increase energy
output in developing countries offers particular promise. All these types
of aid benefit our long-run economic and political interests.

Progress was made on a number of economic issues in negotiations throughout
the U.N. system. However, in spite of lengthy efforts in the United
Nations, agreement has not been reached on how to launch a process of
Global Negotiations in which nations might collectively work to solve such
important issues as energy, food, protectionism, and population pressures.
The United States continues to believe that progress can best be made when
nations focus on such specific problems, rather than on procedural and
institutional questions. It will continue to work to move the North-South
dialogue into a more constructive phase.

FOOD--THE WAR ON HUNGER

The War on Hunger must be a continuous urgent priority. Major portions of
the world's population continue to be threatened by the specter of hunger
and malnutrition. During the past year, some 150 million people in 36
African countries were faced with near disaster as the result of serious
drought, induced food shortages. Our government, working in concert with
the U.N.'s Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), helped to respond to
that need. But the problems of hunger cannot be solved by short-term
measures. We must continue to support those activities, bilateral and
multilateral, which aim at improving food production especially in
developing countries and assuring global food security. These measures are
necessary to the maintenance of a stable and healthy world economy.

I am pleased that negotiation of a new Food Aid Convention, which
guarantees a minimum annual level of food assistance, was successfully
concluded in March. The establishment of the International Emergency Wheat
Reserve will enable the U.S. to meet its commitment under the new
Convention to feed hungry people, even in times of short supply.

Of immediate concern is the prospect of millions of Africans threatened by
famine because of drought and civil disturbances. The U.S. plea for
increased food aid resulted in the organization of an international
pledging conference and we are hopeful that widespread starvation will be
avoided.

Good progress has been made since the Venice Economic Summit called for
increased effort on this front. We and other donor countries have begun to
assist poor countries develop long-term strategies to improve their food
production. The World Bank will invest up to $4 billion in the next few
years in improving the grain storage and food-handling capacity of
countries prone to food shortages.

Good progress has been made since the Tokyo Economic Summit called for
increased effort on this front. The World Bank is giving this problem top
priority, as are some other donor countries. The resources of the
consultative Group on International Agricultural Research will be doubled
over a five-year period. The work of our own Institute of Scientific and
Technological Cooperation will further strengthen the search for relevant
new agricultural technologies.

The goal of freeing the world from hunger by the year 2000 should command
the full support of all countries.

The Human Dimension of Foreign Policy

HUMAN RIGHTS

The human rights policy of the United States has been an integral part of
our overall foreign policy for the past several years. This policy serves
the national interest of the United States in several important ways: by
encouraging respect by governments for the basic rights of human beings, it
promotes peaceful, constructive change, reduces the likelihood of internal
pressures for violent change and for the exploitation of these by our
adversaries, and thus directly serves our long-term interest in peace and
stability; by matching espousal of fundamental American principles of
freedom with specific foreign policy actions, we stand out in vivid
contrast to our ideological adversaries; by our efforts to expand freedom
elsewhere, we render our own freedom, and our own nation, more secure.
Countries that respect human rights make stronger allies and better
friends.

Rather than attempt to dictate what system of government or institutions
other countries should have, the U.S. supports, throughout the world, the
internationally recognized human rights which all members of the United
Nations have pledged themselves to respect. There is more than one model
that can satisfy the continuing human reach for freedom and justice:

1980 has been a year of some disappointments, but has also seen some
positive developments in the ongoing struggle for fulfillment of human
rights throughout the world. In the year we have seen:

--Free elections were held and democratic governments installed in Peru,
Dominica, and Jamaica. Honduras held a free election for installation of a
constituent assembly. An interim government was subsequently named pointing
toward national presidential elections in 1981. Brazil continues on its
course of political liberalization.

--The "Charter of Conduct" signed in Riobamba, Ecuador, by Ecuador,
Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Costa Rica, Panama and Spain, affirms the
importance of democracy and human rights for the Andean countries.

--The Organization of American States, in its annual General Assembly,
approved a resolution in support of the Inter-American Human Rights
Commission's work. The resolution took note of the Commission's annual
report, which described the status of human rights in Chile, El Salvador,
Paraguay and Uruguay; and the special reports on Argentina and Haiti, which
described human rights conditions as investigated during on-site
inspections to these countries.

--The awarding of the Nobel Prize for Peace to Adolfo Perez Esquivel of
Argentina for his non-violent advocacy of human rights.

--The United States was able to rejoin the International Labor
Organization after an absence of two years, as that U.N. body reformed its
procedures to return to its original purpose of strengthening
employer-employee-government relations to insure human rights for the
working people of the world.

The United States, of course, cannot take credit for all these various
developments. But we can take satisfaction in knowing that our policies
encourage and perhaps influence them.

Those who see a contradiction between our security and our humanitarian
interests forget that the basis for a secure and stable society is the bond
of trust between a government and its people. I profoundly believe that the
future of our world is not to be found in authoritarianism: that wears the
mask of order, or totalitarianism that wears the mask of justice. Instead,
let us find our future in the human face of democracy, the human voice of
individual liberty, the human hand of economic development.

HUMANITARIAN AID

The United States has continued to play its traditional role of safehaven
for those who flee or are forced to flee their homes because of persecution
or war. During 1980, the United States provided resettlement opportunities
for 216,000 refugees from countries around the globe. In addition, the
United States joined with other nations to provide relief to refugees in
country of first asylum in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia.

The great majority of refugee admissions continued to be from Indo-china.
During 1980, 168,000 Indo-chinese were resettled in the United States.
Although refugee populations persist in camps in Southeast Asia, and
refugees continue to flee Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea, the flow is not as
great as in the past. One factor in reducing the flow from Vietnam has been
the successful negotiation and commencement of an Orderly Departure Program
which permits us to process Vietnamese for resettlement in the United
States with direct departure from Ho Chi Minh Ville in an orderly fashion.
The first group of 250 departed Vietnam for the United States in December,
1980.

In addition to the refugees admitted last year, the United States accepted
for entry into the United States 125,000 Cubans who were expelled by Fidel
Castro. Federal and state authorities, as well as private voluntary
agencies, responded with unprecedented vigor to coping with the unexpected
influx of Cubans.

Major relief efforts to aid refugees in countries of first asylum continued
in several areas of the world. In December, 1980, thirty-two nations,
meeting in New York City, agreed to contribute $65 million to the
continuing famine relief program in Kampuchea. Due in great part to the
generosity of the American people and the leadership exercised in the
international arena by the United States, we have played the pivotal role
in ameliorating massive suffering in Kampuchea.

The United States has taken the lead among a group of donor countries who
are providing relief to some two million refugees in the Horn of Africa who
have been displaced by fighting in Ethiopia. U.S. assistance, primarily to
Somalia, consists of $35 million worth of food and $18 million in cash and
kind. Here again, United States efforts can in large part be credited with
keeping hundreds of thousands of people alive.

Another major international relief effort has been mounted in Pakistan. The
United States is one of 25 countries plus the European Economic Community
who have been helping the Government of Pakistan to cope with the problem
of feeding and sheltering the more than one million refugees that have been
generated by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

In April, 1980, the Congress passed the Refugee Act of 1980 which brought
together, for the first time, in one piece of legislation the various
threads of U.S. policy towards refugees. The law laid down a new, broader
definition of the term refugee, established mechanisms for arriving at a
level of refugee admissions through consultation with Congress, and
established the Office of the United States Coordinator for Refugees.

It cannot be ignored that the destructive and aggressive policies of the
Soviet Union have added immeasurably to the suffering in these three tragic
situations.

The Control of Nuclear Weapons

Together with our friends and allies, we are striving to build a world in
which peoples with diverse interests can live freely and prosper. But all
that humankind has achieved to date, all that we are seeking to accomplish,
and human existence itself can be undone in an instant--in the catastrophe
of a nuclear war.

Thus one of the central objectives of my Administration has been to control
the proliferation of nuclear weapons to those nations which do not have
them, and their further development by the existing nuclear powers--
notably the Soviet Union and the United States.

NON-PROLIFERATION

My Administration has been committed to stemming the spread of nuclear
weapons. Nuclear proliferation would raise the spectre of the use of
nuclear explosives in crucial, unstable regions of the world endangering
not only our security and that of our Allies, but that of the whole world.
Non-proliferation is not and can not be a unilateral U.S. policy, nor
should it be an issue of contention between the industrialized and
developing states. The international non-proliferation effort requires the
support of suppliers as well as importers of nuclear technology and
materials.

We have been proceeding on a number of fronts:

--First, we have been seeking to encourage nations to accede to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty. The U.S. is also actively encouraging other
nations to accept full-scope safeguards on all of their nuclear activities
and is asking other nuclear suppliers to adopt a full-scope safeguards
requirement as a condition for future supply.

--Second, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), which
was completed in 1980, demonstrated that suppliers and recipients can work
together on these technically complex and sensitive issues. While
differences remain, the INFCE effort provides a broader international basis
for national decisions which must balance energy needs with
non-proliferation concerns.

--Finally, we are working to encourage regional cooperation and restraint.
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco which will contribute to the
lessening of nuclear dangers for our Latin American neighbors ought now to
be ratified by the United States Senate.

LIMITATIONS ON STRATEGIC ARMS

I remain convinced that the SALT II Treaty is in our Nation's security
interest and that it would add significantly to the control of nuclear
weapons. I strongly support continuation of the SALT process and the
negotiation of more far-reaching mutual restraints on nuclear weaponry.

CONCLUSION

We have new support in the world for our purposes of national independence
and individual human dignity. We have a new will at home to do what is
required to keep us the strongest nation on earth.

We must move together into this decade with the strength which comes from
realization of the dangers before us and from the confidence that together
we can overcome them.  The White House, January 16, 1981.
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the House and the Senate, distinguished
Americans here as visitors in this Chamber, as am I. It is nice to have a fresh
excuse for giving a long speech. (Laughter)

When Presidents speak to Congress and the Nation from this podium, typically
they comment on the full range in challenges and opportunities that face the
United States. But this is not an ordinary time, and for all the many tasks that
require our attention, I believe tonight one calls on us to focus, to unite, and
to act. And that is our economy. For more than anything else, our task tonight
as Americans is to make our economy thrive again.

Let me begin by saying that it has been too long, at least three decades, since
a President has come and challenged Americans to join him on a great national
journey, not merely to consume the bounty of today but to invest for a much
greater one tomorrow.

Like individuals, nations must ultimately decide how they wish to conduct
themselves, how they wish to be thought of by those with whom they live, and
later, how they wish to be judged by history. Like every individual man and
woman, nations must decide whether they are prepared to rise to the occasions
history presents them.

We have always been a people of youthful energy and daring spirit. And at this
historic moment, as communism has fallen, as freedom is spreading around the
world, as a global economy is taking shape before our eyes, Americans have
called for change. And now it is up to those of us in this room to deliver for
them.

Our Nation needs a new direction. Tonight I present to you a comprehensive plan
to set our Nation on that new course. I believe we will find our new direction
in the basic old values that brought us here over the last two centuries: a
commitment to opportunity, to individual responsibility, to community, to work,
to family, and to faith. We must now break the habits of both political parties
and say there can be no more something for nothing and admit frankly that we are
all in this together.

The conditions which brought us as a nation to this point are well-known: two
decades of low productivity, growth, and stagnant wages; persistent unemployment
and underemployment; years of huge Government deficits and declining investment
in our future; exploding health care costs and lack of coverage for millions of
Americans; legions of poor children; education and job training opportunities
inadequate to the demands of this tough, global economy. For too long we have
drifted without a strong sense of purpose or responsibility or community.

And our political system so often has seemed paralyzed by special interest
groups, by partisan bickering, and by the sheer complexity of our problems. I
believe we can do better because we remain the greatest nation on Earth, the
world's strongest economy, the world's only military superpower. If we have the
vision, the will, and the heart to make the changes we must, we can still enter
the 21st century with possibilities our parents could not even have imagined and
enter it having secured the American dream for ourselves and for future
generations.

I well remember 12 years ago President Reagan stood at this very podium and told
you and the American people that if our national debt were stacked in
thousand-dollar bills, the stack would reach 67 miles into space. Well, today
that stack would reach 267 miles. I tell you this not to assign blame for this
problem. There is plenty of blame to go around in both branches of the
Government and both parties. The time has come for the blame to end. I did not
seek this office to place blame. I come here tonight to accept responsibility,
and I want you to accept responsibility with me. And if we do right by this
country, I do not care who gets the credit for it.

The plan I offer you has four fundamental components. First, it shifts our
emphasis in public and private spending from consumption to investment,
initially by jumpstarting the economy in the short term and investing in our
people, their jobs, and their incomes over the long run. Second, it changes the
rhetoric of the past into the actions of the present by honoring work and
families in every part of our public decision-making. Third, it substantially
reduces the Federal deficit honestly and credibly by using in the beginning the
most conservative estimates of Government revenues, not, as the executive branch
has done so often in the past, using the most optimistic ones. And finally, it
seeks to earn the trust of the American people by paying for these plans first
with cuts in Government waste and efficiency; second, with cuts, not gimmicks,
in Government spending; and by fairness, for a change, in the way additional
burdens are borne.

Tonight I want to talk with you about what Government can do because I believe
Government must do more. But let me say first that the real engine of economic
growth in this country is the private sector, and second, that each of us must
be an engine of growth and change. The truth is that as Government creates more
opportunity in this new and different time, we must also demand more
responsibility in turn.

Our immediate priority must be to create jobs, create jobs now. Some people say,
"Well, we're in a recovery, and we don't have to do that." Well, we all hope
we're in a recovery, but we're sure not creating new jobs. And there's no
recovery worth its salt that doesn't put the American people back to work.

To create jobs and guarantee a strong recovery, I call on Congress to enact an
immediate package of jobs investments of over $30 billion to put people to work
now, to create a half a million jobs: jobs to rebuild our highways and airports,
to renovate housing, to bring new life to rural communities, and spread hope and
opportunity among our Nation's youth. Especially I want to emphasize, after the
events of last year in Los Angeles and the countless stories of despair in our
cities and in our poor rural communities, this proposal will create almost
700,000 new summer jobs for displaced, unemployed young people alone this
summer. And tonight I invite America's business leaders to join us in this
effort so that together we can provide over one million summer jobs in cities
and poor rural areas for our young people.

Second, our plan looks beyond today's business cycle because our aspirations
extend into the next century. The heart of this plan deals with the long term.
It is an investment program designed to increase public and private investment
in areas critical to our economic future. And it has a deficit reduction program
that will increase the savings available for the private sector to invest, will
lower interest rates, will decrease the percentage of the Federal budget claimed
by interest payments, and decrease the risk of financial market disruptions that
could adversely affect our economy.

Over the long run, all this will bring us a higher rate of economic growth,
improved productivity, more high-quality jobs, and an improved economic
competitive position in the world. In order to accomplish both increased
investment and deficit reduction, something no American Government has ever been
called upon to do at the same time before, spending must be cut and taxes must
be raised.

The spending cuts I recommend were carefully thought through in a way to
minimize any adverse economic impact, to capture the peace dividend for
investment purposes, and to switch the balance in the budget from consumption to
more investment. The tax increases and the spending cuts were both designed to
assure that the cost of this historic program to face and deal with our problems
will be borne by those who could readily afford it the most. Our plan is
designed, furthermore, and perhaps in some ways most importantly, to improve the
health of American business through lower interest rates, more incentives to
invest, and better trained workers.

Because small business has created such a high percentage of all the new jobs in
our Nation over the last 10 or 15 years, our plan includes the boldest targeted
incentives for small business in history. We propose a permanent investment tax
credit for the smallest firms in this country, with revenues of under $5
million. That's about 90 percent of the firms in America, employing about 40
percent of the work force but creating a big majority of the net new jobs for
more than a decade. And we propose new rewards for entrepreneurs who take new
risks. We propose to give small business access to all the new technologies of
our time. And we propose to attack this credit crunch which has denied small
business the credit they need to flourish and prosper.

With a new network of community development banks and $1 billion to make the
dream of enterprise zones real, we propose to bring new hope and new jobs to
storefronts and factories from south Boston to south Texas to south central Los
Angeles. This plan invests in our roads, our bridges, our transit systems, in
high-speed railways and high-tech information systems. And it provides the most
ambitious environmental cleanup in partnership with State and local government
of our time, to put people to work and to preserve the environment for our
future.

Standing as we are on the edge of a new century, we know that economic growth
depends as never before on opening up new markets overseas and expanding the
volume of world trade. And so, we will insist on fair trade rules in
international markets as a part of a national economic strategy to expand trade,
including the successful completion of the latest round of world trade talks and
the successful completion of a North American Free Trade Agreement with
appropriate safeguards for our workers and for the environment.

At the same time -- and I say this to you in both parties and across America
tonight, all the people who are listening -- it is not enough to pass a budget or
even to have a trade agreement. This world is changing so fast that we must have
aggressive, targeted attempts to create the high-wage jobs of the future. That's
what all our competitors are doing. We must give special attention to those
critical industries that are going to explode in the 21st century but that are
in trouble in America today, like aerospace. We must provide special assistance
to areas and to workers displaced by cuts in the defense budget and by other
unavoidable economic dislocations.

And again I will say we must do this together. I pledge to you that I will do my
best to see that business and labor and Government work together for a change.

But all of our efforts to strengthen the economy will fail -- let me say this
again; I feel so strongly about this -- all of our efforts to strengthen the
economy will fail unless we also take this year, not next year, not 5 years from
now but this year, bold steps to reform our health care system.

In 1992, we spent 14 percent of our income on health care, more than 30 percent
more than any other country in the world, and yet we were the only advanced
nation that did not provide a basic package of health care benefits to all of
its citizens. Unless we change the present pattern, 50 percent of the growth in
the deficit between now and the year 2000 will be in health care costs. By the
year 2000 almost 20 percent of our income will be in health care. Our families
will never be secure, our businesses will never be strong, and our Government
will never again be fully solvent until we tackle the health care crisis. We
must do it this year.

The combination of the rising cost of care and the lack of care and the fear of
losing care are endangering the security and the very lives of millions of our
people. And they are weakening our economy every day. Reducing health care costs
can liberate literally hundreds of billions of dollars for new investment in
growth and jobs. Bringing health costs in line with inflation would do more for
the private sector in this country than any tax cut we could give and any
spending program we could promote. Reforming health care over the long run is
critically essential to reducing not only our deficit but to expanding
investment in America.

Later this spring, after the First Lady and the many good people who are helping
her all across the country complete their work, I will deliver to Congress a
comprehensive plan for health care reform that finally will bring costs under
control and provide security to all of our families, so that no one will be
denied the coverage they need but so that our economic future will not be
compromised either. We'll have to root out fraud and overcharges and make sure
that paperwork no longer chokes your doctor. We'll have to maintain the highest
American standards and the right to choose in a system that is the world's
finest for all those who can access it. But first we must make choices. We must
choose to give the American people the quality they demand and deserve with a
system that will not bankrupt the country or further drive more Americans into
agony.

Let me further say that I want to work with all of you on this. I realize this
is a complicated issue. But we must address it. And I believe if there is any
chance that Republicans and Democrats who disagree on taxes and spending or
anything else could agree on one thing, surely we can all look at these numbers
and go home and tell our people the truth. We cannot continue these spending
patterns in public or private dollars for health care for less and less and less
every year. We can do better. And I will work to do better.

Perhaps the most fundamental change the new direction I propose offers is its
focus on the future and its investment which I seek in our children. Each day we
delay really making a commitment to our children carries a dear cost. Half of
the 2-year-olds in this country today don't receive the immunizations they need
against deadly diseases. Our plan will provide them for every eligible child.
And we know now that we will save $10 later for every $1 we spend by eliminating
preventable childhood diseases. That's a good investment no matter how you
measure it.

I recommend that the women, infants, and children's nutrition program be
expanded so that every expectant mother who needs the help gets it. We all know
that Head Start, a program that prepares children for school, is a success
story. We all know that it saves money. But today it just reaches barely over
one-third of all the eligible children. Under this plan, every eligible child
will be able to get a head start. This is not just the right thing to do; it is
the smart thing to do. For every dollar we invest today, we'll save $3 tomorrow.
We have to start thinking about tomorrow. I've heard that somewhere before.
(Laughter)

We have to ask more in our schools of our students, our teachers, our
principals, our parents. Yes, we must give them the resources they need to meet
high standards, but we must also use the authority and the influence and the
funding of the Education Department to promote strategies that really work in
learning. Money alone is not enough. We have to do what really works to increase
learning in our schools.

We have to recognize that all of our high school graduates need some further
education in order to be competitive in this global economy. So we have to
establish a partnership between businesses and education and the Government for
apprenticeship programs in every State in this country to give our people the
skills they need. Lifelong learning must benefit not just young high school
graduates but workers, too, throughout their career. The average 18-year-old
today will change jobs seven times in a lifetime. We have done a lot in this
country on worker training in the last few years, but the system is too
fractured. We must develop a unified, simplified, sensible, streamlined
worker-training program so that workers receive the training they need
regardless of why they lost their jobs or whether they simply need to learn
something new to keep them. We have got to do better on this.

And finally, I propose a program that got a great response from the American
people all across this country last year: a program of national service to make
college loans available to all Americans and to challenge them at the same time
to give something back to their country as teachers or police officers or
community service workers; to give them the option to pay the loans back, but at
tax time so they can't beat the bill, but to encourage them instead to pay it
back by making their country stronger and making their country better and giving
us the benefit of their knowledge.

A generation ago when President Kennedy proposed and the United States Congress
embraced the Peace Corps, it defined the character of a whole generation of
Americans committed to serving people around the world. In this national service
program, we will provide more than twice as many slots for people before they go
to college to be in national service than ever served in the Peace Corps. This
program could do for this generation of Members of Congress what the land grant
college act did and what the GI bill did for former Congressmen. In the future,
historians who got their education through the national service loan will look
back on you and thank you for giving America a new lease on life, if you meet
this challenge.

If we believe in jobs and we believe in learning, we must believe in rewarding
work. If we believe in restoring the values that make America special, we must
believe that there is dignity in all work, and there must be dignity for all
workers. To those who care for our sick, who tend our children, who do our most
difficult and tiring jobs, the new direction I propose will make this solemn,
simple commitment: By expanding the refundable earned-income tax credit, we will
make history. We will reward the work of millions of working poor Americans by
realizing the principle that if you work 40 hours a week and you've got a child
in the house, you will no longer be in poverty.

Later this year, we will offer a plan to end welfare as we know it. I have
worked on this issue for the better part of a decade. And I know from personal
conversations with many people that no one, no one wants to change the welfare
system as badly as those who are trapped in it. I want to offer the people on
welfare the education, the training, the child care, the health care they need
to get back on their feet, but say after 2 years they must get back to work,
too, in private business if possible, in public service if necessary. We have to
end welfare as a way of life and make it a path to independence and dignity.

Our next great goal should be to strengthen our families. I compliment the
Congress for passing the Family and Medical Leave Act as a good first step, but
it is time to do more. This plan will give this country the toughest child
support enforcement system it has ever had. It is time to demand that people
take responsibility for the children they bring in this world.

And I ask you to help to protect our families against the violent crime which
terrorizes our people and which tears our communities apart. We must pass a
tough crime bill. I support not only the bill which didn't quite make it to the
President's desk last year but also an initiative to put 100,000 more police
officers on the street, to provide boot camps for first-time nonviolent
offenders for more space for the hardened criminals in jail. And I support an
initiative to do what we can to keep guns out of the hands of criminals. Let me
say this. I will make you this bargain: If you will pass the Brady bill, I'll
sure sign it.

Let me say now, we should move to the harder parts.

I think it is clear to every American, including every Member of Congress of
both parties, that the confidence of the people who pay our bills in our
institutions in Washington is not high. We must restore it. We must begin again
to make Government work for ordinary taxpayers, not simply for organized
interest groups. And that beginning must start with real political reform. I am
asking the United States Congress to pass a real campaign finance reform bill
this year. I ask you to increase the participation of the American people by
passing the motor voter bill promptly. I ask you to deal with the undue
influence of special interests by passing a bill to end the tax deduction for
lobbying and to act quickly to require all the people who lobby you to register
as lobbyists by passing the lobbying registration bill.

Believe me, they were cheering that last section at home. I believe lobby reform
and campaign finance reform are a sure path to increased popularity for
Republicans and Democrats alike because it says to the voters back home, "This
is your House. This is your Senate. We're your hired hands, and every penny we
draw is your money."

Next, to revolutionize Government we have to ensure that we live within our
means, and that should start at the top and with the White House. In the last
few days I have announced a cut in the White House staff of 25 percent, saving
approximately $10 million. I have ordered administrative cuts in budgets of
agencies and departments. I have cut the Federal bureaucracy, or will over the
next 4 years, by approximately 100,000 positions, for a combined savings of $9
billion. It is time for Government to demonstrate, in the condition we're in,
that we can be as frugal as any household in America.

And that's why I also want to congratulate the Congress. I noticed the
announcement of the leadership today that Congress is taking similar steps to
cut its costs. I think that is important. I think it will send a very clear
signal to the American people.

But if we really want to cut spending, we're going to have to do more, and some
of it will be difficult. Tonight I call for an across-the-board freeze in
Federal Government salaries for one year. And thereafter, during this 4-year
period, I recommend that salaries rise at one point lower than the cost of
living allowance normally involved in Federal pay increases.

Next, I recommend that we make 150 specific budget cuts, as you know, and that
all those who say we should cut more be as specific as I have been. Finally, let
me say to my friends on both sides of the aisle, it is not enough simply to cut
Government; we have to rethink the whole way it works. When I became President I
was amazed at just the way the White House worked, in ways that added lots of
money to what taxpayers had to pay, outmoded ways that didn't take maximum
advantage of technology and didn't do things that any business would have done
years ago to save taxpayers' money.

So I want to bring a new spirit of innovation into every Government Department.
I want to push education reform, as I said, not just to spend more money but to
really improve learning. Some things work, and some things don't. We ought to be
subsidizing the things that work and discouraging the things that don't. I'd
like to use that Superfund to clean up pollution for a change and not just pay
lawyers.

In the aftermath of all the difficulties with the savings and loans, we must use
Federal bank regulators to protect the security and safety of our financial
institutions, but they should not be used to continue the credit crunch and to
stop people from making sensible loans.

I'd like for us to not only have welfare reform but to reexamine the whole focus
of all of our programs that help people, to shift them from entitlement programs
to empowerment programs. In the end we want people not to need us anymore. I
think that's important.

But in the end we have to get back to the deficit. For years there's been a lot
of talk about it but very few credible efforts to deal with it. And now I
understand why, having dealt with the real numbers for 4 weeks. But I believe
this plan does; it tackles the budget deficit seriously and over the long term.
It puts in place one of the biggest deficit reductions and one of the biggest
changes in Federal priorities, from consumption to investment, in the history of
this country at the same time over the next 4 years.

Let me say to all the people watching us tonight who will ask me these questions
beginning tomorrow as I go around the country and who've asked it in the past:
We're not cutting the deficit just because experts say it's the thing to do or
because it has some intrinsic merit. We have to cut the deficit because the more
we spend paying off the debt, the less tax dollars we have to invest in jobs and
education and the future of this country. And the more money we take out of the
pool of available savings, the harder it is for people in the private sector to
borrow money at affordable interest rates for a college loan for their children,
for a home mortgage, or to start a new business.

That's why we've got to reduce the debt, because it is crowding out other
activities that we ought to be engaged in and that the American people ought to
be engaged in. We cut the deficit so that our children will be able to buy a
home, so that our companies can invest in the future and in retraining their
workers, so that our Government can make the kinds of investments we need to be
a stronger and smarter and safer nation.

If we don't act now, you and I might not even recognize this Government 10 years
from now. If we just stay with the same trends of the last 4 years, by the end
of the decade the deficit will be $635 billion a year, almost 80 percent of our
gross domestic product. And paying interest on that debt will be the costliest
Government program of all. We'll still be the world's largest debtor. And when
Members of Congress come here, they'll be devoting over 20 cents on the dollar
to interest payments, more than half of the budget to health care and to other
entitlements. And you'll come here and deliberate and argue over 6 or 7 cents on
the dollar, no matter what America's problems are. We will not be able to have
the independence we need to chart the future that we must. And we'll be terribly
dependent on foreign funds for a large portion of our investment.

This budget plan, by contrast, will by 1997 cut $140 billion in that year alone
from the deficit, a real spending cut, a real revenue increase, a real deficit
reduction, using the independent numbers of the Congressional Budget Office.
(Laughter) Well, you can laugh, my fellow Republicans, but I'll point out that
the Congressional Budget Office was normally more conservative in what was going
to happen and closer to right than previous Presidents have been.

I did this so that we could argue about priorities with the same set of numbers.
I did this so that no one could say I was estimating my way out of this
difficulty. I did this because if we can agree together on the most prudent
revenues we're likely to get if the recovery stays and we do right things
economically, then it will turn out better for the American people than we say.
In the last 12 years, because there were differences over the revenue estimates,
you and I know that both parties were given greater elbow room for
irresponsibility. This is tightening the rein on the Democrats as well as the
Republicans. Let's at least argue about the same set of numbers so the American
people will think we're shooting straight with them.

As I said earlier, my recommendation makes more than 150 difficult reductions to
cut the Federal spending by a total of $246 billion. We are eliminating programs
that are no longer needed, such as nuclear power research and development. We're
slashing subsidies and canceling wasteful projects. But many of these programs
were justified in their time, and a lot of them are difficult for me to
recommend reductions in, some really tough ones for me personally. I recommend
that we reduce interest subsidies to the Rural Electric Administration. That's a
difficult thing for me to recommend. But I think that I cannot exempt the things
that exist in my State or in my experience, if I ask you to deal with things
that are difficult for you to deal with. We're going to have to have no sacred
cows except the fundamental abiding interest of the American people.

I have to say that we all know our Government has been just great at building
programs. The time has come to show the American people that we can limit them
too; that we can not only start things, that we can actually stop things.

About the defense budget, I raise a hope and a caution. As we restructure our
military forces to meet the new threats of the post-cold-war world, it is true
that we can responsibly reduce our defense budget. And we may all doubt what
that range of reductions is, but let me say that as long as I am President, I
will do everything I can to make sure that the men and women who serve under the
American flag will remain the best trained, the best prepared, the best equipped
fighting force in the world. And every one of you should make that solemn
pledge. We still have responsibilities around the world. We are the world's only
superpower. This is still a dangerous and uncertain time, and we owe it to the
people in uniform to make sure that we adequately provide for the national
defense and for their interests and needs. Backed by an effective national
defense and a stronger economy, our Nation will be prepared to lead a world
challenged as it is everywhere by ethnic conflict, by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, by the global democratic revolution, and by
challenges to the health of our global environment.

I know this economic plan is ambitious, but I honestly believe it is necessary
for the continued greatness of the United States. And I think it is paid for
fairly, first by cutting Government, then by asking the most of those who
benefited the most in the past, and by asking more Americans to contribute today
so that all of us can prosper tomorrow.

For the wealthiest, those earning more than $180,000 per year, I ask you all who
are listening tonight to support a raise in the top rate for Federal income
taxes from 31 to 36 percent. We recommend a 10 percent surtax on incomes over
$250,000 a year, and we recommend closing some loopholes that let some people
get away without paying any tax at all.

For businesses with taxable incomes in excess of $10 million, we recommend a
raise in the corporate tax rate, also to 36 percent, as well as a cut in the
deduction for business entertainment expenses. Our plan seeks to attack tax
subsidies that actually reward companies more for shutting their operations down
here and moving them overseas than for staying here and reinvesting in America.
I say that as someone who believes that American companies should be free to
invest around the world and as a former Governor who actively sought investment
of foreign companies in my State. But the Tax Code should not express a
preference to American companies for moving somewhere else, and it does in
particular cases today.

We will seek to ensure that, through effective tax enforcement, foreign
corporations who do make money in America simply pay the same taxes that
American companies make on the same income.

To middle class Americans who have paid a great deal for the last 12 years and
from whom I ask a contribution tonight, I will say again as I did on Monday
night: You're not going alone any more, you're certainly not going first, and
you're not going to pay more for less as you have too often in the past. I want
to emphasize the facts about this plan: 98.8 percent of America's families will
have no increase in their income tax rates, only 1.2 percent at the top.

Let me be clear: There will also be no new cuts in benefits for Medicare. As we
move toward the 4th year, with the explosion in health care costs, as I said,
projected to account for 50 percent of the growth of the deficit between now and
the year 2000, there must be planned cuts in payments to providers, to doctors,
to hospitals, to labs, as a way of controlling health care costs. But I see
these only as a stopgap until we can reform the entire health care system. If
you'll help me do that, we can be fair to the providers and to the consumers of
health care. Let me repeat this, because I know it matters to a lot of you on
both sides of the aisle. This plan does not make a recommendation for new cuts
in Medicare benefits for any beneficiary.

Secondly, the only change we are making in Social Security is one that has
already been publicized. The plan does ask older Americans with higher incomes,
who do not rely solely on Social Security to get by, to contribute more. This
plan will not affect the 80 percent of Social Security recipients who do not pay
taxes on Social Security now. Those who do not pay tax on Social Security now
will not be affected by this plan.

Our plan does include a broad-based tax on energy, and I want to tell you why I
selected this and why I think it's a good idea. I recommend that we adopt a Btu
tax on the heat content of energy as the best way to provide us with revenue to
lower the deficit because it also combats pollution, promotes energy efficiency,
promotes the independence, economically, of this country as well as helping to
reduce the debt, and because it does not discriminate against any area. Unlike a
carbon tax, that's not too hard on the coal States; unlike a gas tax, that's not
too tough on people who drive a long way to work; unlike an ad valorem tax, it
doesn't increase just when the price of an energy source goes up. And it is
environmentally responsible. It will help us in the future as well as in the
present with the deficit.

Taken together, these measures will cost an American family with an income of
about $40,000 a year less than $17 a month. It will cost American families with
incomes under $30,000 nothing because of other programs we propose, principally
those raising the earned-income tax credit.

Because of our publicly stated determination to reduce the deficit, if we do
these things, we will see the continuation of what's happened just since the
election. Just since the election, since the Secretary of the Treasury, the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and others who have begun to
speak out publicly in favor of a tough deficit reduction plan, interest rates
have continued to fall long-term. That means that for the middle class who will
pay something more each month, if they had any credit needs or demands, their
increased energy costs will be more than offset by lower interest costs for
mortgages, consumer loans, credit cards. This can be a wise investment for them
and their country now.

I would also point out what the American people already know, and that is,
because we're a big, vast country where we drive long distances, we have
maintained far lower burdens on energy than any other advanced country. We will
still have far lower burdens on energy than any other advanced country. And
these will be spread fairly, with real attempts to make sure that no cost is
imposed on families with incomes under $30,000 and that the costs are very
modest until you get into the higher income groups where the income taxes
trigger in.

Now, I ask all of you to consider this: Whatever you think of the tax program,
whatever you think of the spending cuts, consider the cost of not changing.
Remember the numbers that you all know. If we just keep on doing what we're
doing, by the end of the decade we'll have a $650-billion-a-year deficit. If we
just keep on doing what we're doing, by the end of the decade 20 percent of our
national income will go to health care every year, twice as much as any other
country on the face of the globe. If we just keep on doing what we're doing,
over 20 cents on the dollar will have to go to service the debt.

Unless we have the courage now to start building our future and stop borrowing
from it, we're condemning ourselves to years of stagnation interrupted by
occasional recessions, to slow growth in jobs, to no more growth in income, to
more debt, to more disappointment. Worse, unless we change, unless we increase
investment and reduce the debt to raise productivity so that we can generate
both jobs and incomes, we will be condemning our children and our children's
children to a lesser life than we enjoyed. Once Americans looked forward to
doubling their living standards every 25 years. At present productivity rates,
it will take 100 years to double living standards, until our grandchildren's
grandchildren are born. I say that is too long to wait.

Tonight the American people know we have to change. But they're also likely to
ask me tomorrow and all of you for the weeks and months ahead whether we have
the fortitude to make the changes happen in the right way. They know that as
soon as I leave this Chamber and you go home, various interest groups will be
out in force lobbying against this or that piece of this plan, and that the
forces of conventional wisdom will offer a thousand reasons why we well ought to
do this but we just can't do it.

Our people will be watching and wondering, not to see whether you disagree with
me on a particular issue but just to see whether this is going to be business as
usual or a real new day, whether we're all going to conduct ourselves as if we
know we're working for them. We must scale the walls of the people's
scepticisms, not with our words but with our deeds. After so many years of
gridlock and indecision, after so many hopeful beginnings and so few promising
results, the American people are going to be harsh in their judgments of all of
us if we fail to seize this moment.

This economic plan can't please everybody. If the package is picked apart, there
will be something that will anger each of us, won't please anybody. But if it is
taken as a whole, it will help all of us. So I ask you all to begin by resisting
the temptation to focus only on a particular spending cut you don't like or some
particular investment that wasn't made. And nobody likes the tax increases, but
let's just face facts. For 20 years, through administrations of both parties,
incomes have stalled and debt has exploded and productivity has not grown as it
should. We cannot deny the reality of our condition. We have got to play the
hand we were dealt and play it as best we can.

My fellow Americans, the test of this plan cannot be "what is in it for me." It
has got to be "what is in it for us." If we work hard and if we work together,
if we rededicate ourselves to creating jobs, to rewarding work, to strengthening
our families, to reinventing our Government, we can lift our country's fortunes
again.

Tonight I ask everyone in this Chamber and every American to look simply into
your heart, to spark your own hopes, to fire your own imagination. There is so
much good, so much possibility, so much excitement in this country now that if
we act boldly and honestly, as leaders should, our legacy will be one of
prosperity and progress. This must be America's new direction. Let us summon the
courage to seize it.

Thank you. God bless America.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, members of the 103rd Congress, my fellow
Americans:

I am not sure what speech is in the TelePrompTer tonight, but I hope we can
talk about the State of the Union.

I ask you to begin by recalling the memory of the giant who presided over
this chamber with such force and grace. Tip O'Neill liked to call himself
"A Man of the House" and he surely was that. But even more, he was a man of
the people, a bricklayer's son who helped to build the great American
middle class. Tip O'Neill never forgot who he was, where he came from, or
who sent him here. Tonight he's smiling down on us for the first time from
the Lord's gallery. But in his honor, may we too also remember who we are,
where we come from, and who sent us here.

If we do that we will return over and over again to the principle that if
we simply give ordinary people equal opportunity, quality education, and a
fair shot at the American dream, they will do extraordinary things.

We gather tonight in a world of changes so profound and rapid that all
nations are tested. Our American heritage has always been to master such
change, to use it to expand opportunity at home, and our leadership abroad.
But for too long and in too many ways, that heritage was abandoned, and our
country drifted.

For 30 years family life in America has been breaking down. For 20 years
the wages of working people have been stagnant or declining. For the 12
years of trickle down economics we built a false prosperity on a hollow
base as our national debt quadrupled. From 1989 to 1992 we experienced the
slowest growth in a half century. For too many families, even when both
parents were working, the American dream has been slipping away.

In 1992 the American people demanded that we change. I year ago I asked all
of you to join me in accepting responsibility for the future of our
country.

Well, we did. We replaced drift and deadlock with renewal and reform. And I
want to thank every one of you here who heard the American people, who
broke gridlock, who gave them the most successful teamwork between a
president and a Congress in 30 years.

Accomplishments

This Congress produced a budget that cut the deficit by half a trillion
dollars, cut spending and raised income taxes on only the wealthiest
Americans. This Congress produced tax relief for millions of low-income
workers to reward work over welfare. It produced NAFTA. It produced the
Brady bill, now the Brady law.

And thank you, Jim Brady, for being here, and God bless you, Sarah. This
Congress produced tax cuts to reduce the taxes of nine out of 10 small
businesses who use the money to invest more and create more jobs. It
produced more research and treatment for AIDS, more childhood
immunizations, more support for women's health research, more affordable
college loans for the middle class, a new national service program for
those who want to give something back to their country and their
communities for higher education, a dramatic increase in high-tech
investments to move us from a defense to a domestic high-tech economy. This
Congress produced a new law--the motor voter bill--to help millions of
people register to vote. It produced family and medical leave--all passed,
all signed into law, with not one single veto.

These accomplishments were all commitments I made when I sought this
office, and in fairness, they all had to be passed by you in this Congress.
But I am persuaded that the real credit belongs to the people who sent us
here, who pay our salaries, who hold our feet to the fire. But what we do
here is really beginning to change lives. Let me just give you one
example.

Family And Medical Leave

I will never forget what the family and medical leave law meant to just one
father I met early one Sunday morning in the White House. It was unusual to
see a family there touring early Sunday morning, but he had his wife and
his three children there, one of them in a wheelchair. And I came up, and
after we had our picture taken and had a little visit, I was walking off,
and that man grabbed me by the arm and he said, "Mr. President, let me tell
you something. My little girl here is desperately ill. She's probably not
going to make it. But because of the family leave law, I was able to take
time off to spend with her, the most important I ever spent in my life,
without losing my job and hurting the rest of my family. It means more to
me than I will ever be able to say. Don't you people up here ever think
what you do doesn't make a difference. It does."

Though we are making a difference, our work has just begun. Many Americans
still haven't felt the impact of what we've done. The recovery still hasn't
touched every community or created enough jobs. Incomes are still stagnant.
There's still too much violence and not enough hope in too many places.

Abroad, the young democracies we are strongly supporting still face very
difficult times and look to us for leadership.

And so tonight, let us resolve to continue the journey of renewal, to
create more and better jobs, to guarantee health security for all, to
reward welfare--work over welfare, to promote democracy abroad and to
begin to reclaim our streets from violent crime and drugs and gangs to
renew our own American community.

Deficit Reduction

Last year, we began to put our house in order by tackling the budget
deficit that was driving us toward bankruptcy. We cut $255 billion in
spending, including entitlements, in over 340 separate budget items. We
froze domestic spending and used honest budget numbers.

Led by the vice president, we've launched a campaign to reinvent
government. We've cut staff, cut perks, even trimmed the fleet of federal
limousines. After years of leaders whose rhetoric attacked bureaucracy but
whose actions expanded it, we will actually reduce it by 252,000 people
over the next five years. By the time we have finished, the federal
bureaucracy will be at its lowest point in 30 years.

Because the deficit was so large and because they benefited from tax cuts
in the 1980s, we did ask the wealthiest Americans to pay more to reduce the
deficit. So on April the 15th, the American people will discover the truth
about what we did last year on taxes. Only the top one--the top 1.2
percent of Americans, as I said all along, will face higher income tax
rates--let me repeat, only the wealthiest 1.2 percent of Americans will
face higher income tax rates and no one else will, and that is the truth.
Of course, there were, as there always are in politics, naysayers who said
this plan wouldn't work, but they were wrong. When I became president, the
experts predicted that next year's deficit would be $300 billion, but
because we acted, those same people now say the deficit's going to be under
$180 billion, 40 percent lower than was previously predicted.

The Economy

Our economic program has helped to produce the lowest core inflation rate
and the lowest interest rates in 20 years, and because those interest rates
are down, business investment and equipment is growing at seven times the
rate of the previous four years. Auto sales are way up, home sales at a
record high. Millions of Americans have refinanced their homes and our
economy has produced 1.6 million private-sector jobs in 1993, more than
were created in the previous four years combined.

The people who supported this economic plan should be proud of its early
results--proud. But everyone in this chamber should know and acknowledge
that there is more to do. Next month I will send you one of the toughest
budgets ever presented to Congress. It will cut spending in more than 300
programs, eliminate 100 domestic programs, and reforms the way in which
governments buy goods and services.

This year we must again make the hard choices to live within the hard
spending ceilings we have set. We must do it. We have proved we can bring
the deficit down without choking off recovery, without punishing seniors or
the middle class, and without putting our national security at risk. If you
will stick with this plan, we will post three consecutive years of
declining deficits for the first time since Harry Truman lived in the White
House. And once again, the buck stops here.

Trade

Our economic plan also bolsters our strength and our credibility around the
world. Once we reduced the deficit and put the steel back into our
competitive edge, the world echoed with the sound of falling trade
barriers. In one year, with NAFTA, with GATT, with our efforts in Asia and
the national export strategy, we did more to open world markets to American
products than at any time in the last two generations. That means more jobs
and rising living standards for the American people, low deficits, low
inflation, low interest rates, low trade barriers and high investments.
These are the building blocks of our recovery. But if we want to take full
advantage of the opportunities before us in the global economy, you all
know we must do more.

As we reduce defense spending, I ask Congress to invest more in the
technologies of tomorrow. Defense conversion will keep us strong militarily
and create jobs for our people here at home.

As we protect our environment, we must invest in the environmental
technologies of the future which will create jobs. This year we will fight
for a revitalized Clean Water Act and a Safe Drinking Water Act and a
reformed Superfund program.

And the vice president is right; we must also work with the private sector
to connect every classroom, every clinic, every library, every hospital in
America into a national information superhighway by the year 2000. Think of
it. Instant access to information will increase productivity. It will help
to educate our children. It will provide better medical care. It will
create jobs. And I call on the Congress to pass legislation to establish
that information superhighway this year.

As we expand opportunity and create jobs, no one can be left out. We must
continue to enforce fair lending and fair housing and all civil rights
laws, because America will never be complete in its renewal until everyone
shares in its bounty. But we all know, too, we can do all these things--
put our economic house in order, expand world trade, target the jobs of the
future, guarantee equal opportunity.

But if we're honest, we'll all admit that this strategy still cannot work
unless we also give our people the education, training and skills they need
to seize the opportunities of tomorrow. We must set tough, world-class
academic and occupational standards for all our children and give our
teachers and students the tools they need to meet them.

Education

Our Goals 2000 proposal will empower individual school districts to
experiment with ideas like chartering their schools to be run by private
corporations or having more public school choice, to do whatever they wish
to do as long as we measure every school by one high standard: Are our
children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global
economy?

Goals 2000 links world-class standards to grassroots reforms and I hope
Congress will pass it without delay. Our school to work initiative will for
the first time link school to the world of work, providing at least one
year of apprenticeship beyond high school. After all, most of the people
we're counting on to build our economic future won't graduate from college.
It's time to stop ignoring them and start empowering them. We must
literally transform our outdated unemployment system into a new
reemployment system. The old unemployment system just sort of kept you
going while you waited for your old job to come back. We've got to have a
new system to move people into new and better jobs because most of those
old jobs just don't come back. And we know that the only way to have real
job security in the future, to get a good job with a growing income, is to
have real skills and the ability to learn new ones. So we've got to
streamline today's patchwork of training programs and make them a source of
new skill for our people who lose their jobs. Reemployment, not
unemployment, must become the centerpiece of our economic renewal. I urge
you to pass it in this session of Congress.

Welfare

And just as we must transform our unemployment system, so must we also
revolutionize our welfare system. It doesn't work; it defies our values as
a nation. If we value work, we can't justify a system that makes welfare
more attractive than work if people are worried about losing their health
care.

If we value responsibility, we can't ignore the $34 billion in child
support absent parents out to be paying to millions of parents who are
taking care of their children--. If we value strong families, we can't
perpetuate a system that actually penalizes those who stay together. Can
you believe that a child who has a child gets more money from the
government for leaving home than for staying home with a parent or a
grandparent? That's not just bad policy, it's wrong and we ought to change
it.

I worked on this problem for years before I became president, with other
governors and with members of Congress in both parties and with the
previous administration of another party. I worked on it with people who
were on welfare, lots of them. And I want to say something to everybody
here who cares about this issue. The people who most want to change this
system are the people who are dependent on it. They want to get off
welfare; they want to go back to work; they want to do right by their
kids.

I once had a hearing when I was a governor and I brought in people on
welfare from all over America who had found their way to work and a woman
from my state who testified was asked this question. What's the best thing
about being off welfare and in a job. And without blinking an eye, she
looked at 40 governors and she said, when my boy goes to school and they
say "What does your mother do for a living?" he can give an answer. These
people want a better system and we ought to give it to them.

Last year, we began this. We gave the states more power to innovate because
we know that a lot of great ideas come from outside Washington and many
states are already using it. Then this Congress took a dramatic step.
Instead of taxing people with modest incomes into poverty, we helped them
to work their way out of poverty by dramatically increasing the earned
income tax credit. It will lift 15 million working families out of poverty,
rewarding work over welfare, making it possible for people to be successful
workers and successful parents. Now that's real welfare reform.

But there is more to be done. This spring I will send you a comprehensive
welfare reform bill that builds on the Family Support Act of 1988 and
restores the basic values of work and responsibility. We will say to
teenagers if you have a child out of wedlock, we'll no longer give you a
check to set up a separate household, we want families to stay together;
say to absent parents who aren't paying their child support if you're not
providing for your children we'll garnish your wages, suspend your license,
track you across state lines, and if necessary make some of you work off
what you owe.

People who bring children into this world cannot and must not walk away
from them.

But to all those who depend on welfare, we should offer ultimately a simple
compact. We will provide the support, the job training, the child care you
need for up to two years, but after that anyone who can work, must, in the
private sector wherever possible, in community service if necessary. That's
the only way we'll ever make welfare what it ought to be, a second chance,
not a way of life.

I know it will be difficult to tackle welfare reform in 1994 at the same
time we tackle health care. But let me point out, I think it is inevitable
and imperative. It is estimated that one million people are on welfare
today because it's the only way they can get health care coverage for their
children. Those who choose to leave welfare for jobs without health
benefits, and many entry level jobs don't have health benefits, find
themselves in the incredible position of paying taxes that help to pay for
health care coverage for those who made the other choice, to stay on
welfare. No wonder people leave work and go back to welfare, to get health
care coverage. We've got to solve the health care problem to have real
welfare reform.

Health Care Reform

So this year we will make history by reforming the health care system. And
I would say to you, all of you my fellow public servants, this is another
issue where the people are way ahead of the politicians.

That may not be popular with either party, but it happens to be the truth.

You know, the first lady has received now almost a million letters from
people all across America and from all walks of life. I'd like to share
just one of them with you. Richard Anderson of Reno, Nevada, lost his job
and, with it, his health insurance. Two weeks later, his wife, Judy,
suffered a cerebral aneurysm. He rushed her to the hospital, where she
stayed in intensive care for 21 days. The Anderson's bills were over
$120,000. Although Judy recovered and Richard went back to work at $8 an
hour, the bills were too much for them and they were literally forced into
bankruptcy.

"Mrs. Clinton," he wrote to Hillary, "no one in the United States of
America should have to lose everything they've worked for all their lives
because they were unfortunate enough to become ill." It was to help the
Richard and Judy Andersons of America that the first lady and so many
others have worked so hard and so long on this health care reform issue. We
owe them our thanks and our action.

I know there are people here who say there's no health care crisis. Tell it
to Richard and Judy Anderson. Tell it to the 58 million Americans who have
no coverage at all for some time each year. Tell it to the 81 million
Americans with those preexisting conditions; those folks are paying more or
they can't get insurance at all or they can't ever change their jobs
because they or someone in their family has one of those preexisting
conditions. Tell it to the small businesses burdened by skyrocketing costs
of insurance. Most small businesses cover their employers, and they pay on
average 35 percent more in premiums than big businesses or government. Or
tell it to the 76 percent of insured Americans, three out of four whose
policies have lifetime limits, and that means they can find themselves
without any coverage at all just when they need it the most.

So, if any of you believe there's no crisis, you tell it to those people,
because I can't.

There are some people who literally do not understand the impact of this
problem on people's lives, but all you have to do is go out and listen to
them. Just go talk to them anywhere, in any congressional district in this
country. They're Republicans and Democrats and independents. It doesn't
have a lick to do with party. They think we don't get it, and it's time we
show that we do get it.

From the day we began, our health care initiative has been designed to
strengthen what is good about our health care system--the world's best
health care professionals, cutting edge research, and wonderful research
institutions, Medicare for older Americans. None of this--none of it
should be put at risk. But we're paying more and more money for less and
less care. Every year, fewer and fewer Americans even get to choose their
doctors. Every year, doctors and nurses spend more time on paperwork and
less time with patients because of the absolute bureaucratic nightmare the
present system has become.

This system is riddled with inefficiency, with abuse, with fraud, and
everybody knows it. In today's health care system, insurance companies call
the shots. They pick whom they cover and how they cover them. They can cut
off your benefits when you need your coverage the most. They are in
charge.

What does it mean? It means every night millions of well-insured Americans
go to bed just an illness, an accident, or a pink slip away from having no
coverage or financial ruin. It means every morning millions of Americans go
to work without any health insurance at all--something the workers in no
other advanced country in the world do. It means that every year more and
more hard working people are told to pick a new doctor because their boss
has had to pick a new plan. And countless others turndown better jobs
because they know, if they take the better job, they'll lose their health
insurance.

If we just let the health care system continue to drift, our country will
have people with less care, fewer choices, and higher bill.

Now, our approach protects the quality of care and people's choices. It
builds on what works today in the private sector, to expand employer based
coverage, to guarantee private insurance for every American. And I might
say, employer based private insurance for every American was proposed 20
years ago by President Richard Nixon to the United States Congress. It was
a good idea then, and it's a better idea today.

Why do we want guaranteed private insurance? Because right now, nine out of
ten people who have insurance get it through their employers--and that
should continue. And if your employer is providing good benefits at
reasonable prices, that should continue too. And that ought to make the
Congress and the president feel better. Our goal is health insurance
everybody can depend on--comprehensive benefits that cover preventive care
and prescription drugs, health premiums that don't just explode when you
get sick or you get older, the power--no matter how small your business is
--to choose dependable insurance at the same competitive rates that
governments and big business get today, one simple form for people who are
sick, and most of all, the freedom to choose a plan and the right to choose
your own doctor.

Our approach protects older Americans. Every plan before the Congress
proposes to slow the growth of Medicare. The difference is this. We believe
those savings should be used to improve health care for senior citizens.
Medicare must be protected, and it should cover prescription drugs, and we
should take the first steps in covering long-term care.

To those who would cut Medicare without protecting seniors, I say the
solution to today's squeeze on middle class working people's health care is
not to put the squeeze on middle class retired people's health care. We can
do better than that. When it's all said and done, it's pretty simple to me.
Insurance ought to mean what it used to mean. You pay a fair price for
security, and when you get sick, health care is always there--no matter
what.

Along with the guarantee of health security, we all have to admit, too,
there must be more responsibility on the part of all of us in how we use
this system. People have to take their kids to get immunized. We should all
take advantage of preventive care. We must all work together to stop the
violence that explodes our emergency rooms. We have to practice better
health habits, and we can't abuse the system. And those who don't have
insurance under our approach will get coverage, but they will have to pay
something for it, too. The minority of businesses that provide no insurance
at all, and in so doing, shift the cost of the care of their employees to
others, should contribute something. People who smoke should pay more for a
pack of cigarettes. Everybody can contribute something if we want to solve
the health care crisis. There can't be anymore something for nothing. It
will not be easy, but it can be done. Now in the coming months I hope very
much to work with both Democrats and Republicans to reform a health care
system by using the market to bring down costs and to achieve lasting
health security. But if you look at history, we see that for 60 years this
country has tried to reform health care. President Roosevelt tried,
President Truman tried, President Nixon tried, President Carter tried.
Every time the special interests were powerful enough to defeat them, but
not this time.

Campaign Finance Reform

I know that facing up to these interests will require courage. It will
raise critical questions about the way we finance our campaigns and how
lobbyists yield their influence. The work of change, frankly, will never
get any easier until we limit the influence of well financed interests who
profit from this current system. So I also must now call on you to finish
the job both houses began last year, by passing tough and meaningful
campaign finance reform and lobby reform legislation this year.

You know, my fellow Americans, this is really a test for all of us. The
American people provide those of us in government service with terrific
health care benefits at reasonable costs. We have health care that's always
there. I think we need to give every hard working, taxpaying American the
same health care security they have already given to us.

I want to make this very clear: I am open, as I have said repeatedly, to
the best ideas of concerned members of both parties. I have no special
brief for any specific approach, even in our own bill, except this: if you
send me legislation that does not guarantee every American private health
insurance that can never be taken away, you will force me to take this pen,
veto the legislation, and we'll come right back here and start all over
again.

But I don't think that's going to happen. I think we're ready to act now. I
believe that you're ready to act now. And if you're ready to guarantee
every American the same health care that you have, health care that can
never be taken away--now, not next year or the year after, now is the time
to stand with the people who sent us here. Now.

Foreign Policy

As we take these steps together to renew our strength at home, we cannot
turn away from our obligations to renew our leadership abroad. This is a
promising moment. Because of the agreements we have reached this year, last
year, Russia's strategic nuclear missiles soon will no longer be pointed at
the United States. Nor will we point ours at them.

Instead of building weapons in space, Russian scientists will help us to
build the international space station.

And of course there are still dangers in the world: rampant arms
proliferation, bitter regional conflicts, ethnic and nationalist tensions
in many new democracies, severe environmental degradation the world over,
and fanatics who seek to cripple the world's cities with terror. As the
world's greatest power, we must therefore maintain our defenses and our
responsibilities. This year we secured indictments against terrorists and
sanctions against those harbor them. We worked to promote
environmentally-sustainable economic growth. We achieved agreements with
Ukraine, with Belarus, with Kazakhstan, to eliminate completely their
nuclear arsenals. We are working to achieve a Korean Peninsula free of
nuclear weapons. We will seek early ratification of the treaty to ban
chemical weapons worldwide. And earlier today we joined with over 30
nations to begin negotiations on a comprehensive ban to stop all nuclear
testing.

But nothing--nothing--is more important to our security than our nation's
armed forces. We honor their contributions, including those who are
carrying out the longest humanitarian airlift in history in Bosnia----
those who will complete their mission in Somalia this year and their brave
comrades who gave their lives there. Our forces are the finest military our
nation has ever had, and I have pledged that as long as I am president they
will remain the best-equipped, the best-trained and the best-prepared
fighting force on the face of the earth.

Defense

Last year, I proposed a defense plan that maintains our post-Cold War
security at a lower cost. This year, many people urged me to cut our
defense spending further to pay for other government programs. I said no.
The budget I send to Congress draws the line against further defense cuts.
It protects the readiness and quality of our forces. Ultimately, the best
strategy is to do that. We must not cut defense further. I hope the
Congress without regard to party will support that position.

Ultimately, the best strategy to ensure our security and to build a durable
peace is to support the advance of democracy elsewhere. Democracies don't
attack each other. They make better trading partners and partners in
diplomacy. That is why we have supported, you and I, the democratic
reformers in Russia and in the other states of the former Soviet bloc. I
applaud the bipartisan support this Congress provided last year for our
initiatives to help Russia, Ukraine and the other states through their epic
transformations.

Our support of reform must combine patience for the enormity of the task
and vigilance for our fundamental interest and values. We will continue to
urge Russia and the other states to press ahead with economic reforms, and
we will seek to cooperate with Russia to solve regional problems while
insisting that, if Russian troops operate in neighboring states, they do so
only when those states agree to their presence and in strict accord with
international standards.

But we must also remember as these nations chart their own futures, and
they must chart their own futures, how much more secure and more prosperous
our own people will be if democratic and market reform succeed all across
the former communist bloc. Our policy has been to support that move and
that has been the policy of the Congress. We should continue it.

Europe

That is why I went to Europe earlier this month, to work with our European
partners to help to integrate all the former communist countries into a
Europe that has the possibility of becoming unified for the first time in
its entire history, it's entire history, based on the simple commitments of
all nations in Europe to democracy, to free markets, and to respect for
existing borders.

With our allies, we have created a partnership for peace that invites
states from the former Soviet bloc and other non-NATO members to work with
NATO in military cooperation. When I met with Central Europe's leaders,
including Lech Walesa and Vaclav Havel, men who put their lives on the line
for freedom, I told them that the security of their region is important to
our country's security.

This year, we must also do more to support democratic renewal and human
rights and sustainable development all around the world. We will ask
Congress to ratify the new GATT accord, we will continue standing by South
Africa as it works its way through its bold and hopeful and difficult
transition to democracy. We will convene a summit of the Western
hemisphere's democratic leaders from Canada to the tip of South America.
And we will continue to press for the restoration of true democracy in
Haiti.

And as we build a more constructive relationship with China, we must
continue to insist on clear signs of improvement in that nation's human
rights record.

Middle East

We will also work for new progress toward the Middle East peace. Last year
the world watched Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat at the White House when
they had their historic handshake of reconciliation. But there is a long,
hard road ahead. And on that road I am determined that I and our
administration will do all we can to achieve a comprehensive and lasting
peace for all the peoples of the region.

Now, there are some in our country who argue that with the Cold War,
America should turn its back on the rest of the world. Many around the
world were afraid we would do just that. But I took this office on a pledge
that had no partisan tinge to keep our nation secure by remaining engaged
in the rest of the world. And this year, because of our work together,
enacting NAFTA, keeping our military strong and prepared, supporting
democracy abroad, we have reaffirmed America's leadership, America's
engagement, and as a result, the American people are more secure than they
were before.

Crime

But while Americans are more secure from threats abroad, I think we all now
that in many ways we are less secure from threats here at home. Everyday
the national peace is shattered by crime.

In Petaluma, California, an innocent slumber party gives way to agonizing
tragedy for the family of Polly Klaas. An ordinary train ride on Long
Island ends in a hail of nine millimeter rounds. A tourist in Florida is
nearly burned alive by bigots simply because he is black. Right here in our
nation's capital, a brave young man named Jason White, a policeman, the son
and grandson of policemen, is ruthlessly gunned down.

Violent crime and the fear it provokes are crippling our society, limiting
personal freedom, and fraying the ties that bind us.

The crime bill before Congress gives you a chance to do something about it,
a chance to be tough and smart. What does that mean? Let me begin by saying
I care a lot about this issue. Many years ago, when I started out in public
life, I was the attorney general of my state. I served as a governor for a
dozen years. I know what it's like to sign laws increasing penalties, to
build more prison cells, to carry out the death penalty. I understand this
issue and it is not a simple thing.

First, we must recognize that most violent crimes are committed by a small
percentage of criminals who too often break the laws even when they are on
parole. Now those who commit crimes should be punished, and those who
commit repeated violent crimes should be told when you commit a third
violent crime, you will be put away and put away for good, three strikes
and you are out.

Second, we must take serious steps to reduce violence and prevent crime,
beginning with more police officers and more community policing. We know
right now that police who work the streets, know the folks, have the
respect of the neighborhood kids, focus on high crime areas, we know that
they are more likely to prevent crime as well as catch criminals. Look at
the experience of Houston, where the crime rate dropped 17 percent in one
year when that approach was taken. Here tonight is one of those community
policemen, a brave, young detective, Kevin Jett, whose beat is eight square
blocks in one of the toughest neighborhoods in New York. Every day he
restores some sanity and safety, and a sense of values and connection to
the people whose lives he protects. I'd like to ask him to stand up and be
recognized tonight.

You will be given a chance to give the children of this country, the law
abiding working people of this country, and don't forget, in the toughest
neighborhoods in this country, in the highest crime neighborhoods in this
country the vast majority of people get up every day and obey the law, pay
their taxes, do their best to raise their kids. They deserve people like
Kevin Jett, and you're going to be given the chance to give the American
people another 100,000 of them, well trained, and I urge you to do it.

You have before you crime legislation which also establishes a police corps
to encourage young people to get an education, and pay it off by serving as
police officers, which encourages retiring military personnel to move into
police forces--and enormous resources for our country, one which has a
safe schools provisions which will give our young people the chance to walk
to school in safety and to be in school in safety instead of dodging
bullets. These are important things.

The third thing we have to do is to build on the Brady Bill--the Brady Law
to take further steps----to take further steps to keep guns out of the
hands of criminals.

Now, I want to say something about this issue. Hunters must always be free
to hunt, law abiding adults should always be free to own guns and protect
their homes. I respect that part of our culture. I grew up in it. But I
want to ask the sportsmen and others who lawfully own guns to join us in
this campaign to reduce gun violence. I say to you, I know you didn't
create this problem, but we need your help to solve it. There is no
sporting purpose on earth that should stop the United States Congress from
banishing assault weapons that outgun police and cut down children.

Fourth, we must remember that drugs are a factor in an enormous percentage
of crimes. Recent studies indicate, sadly, that drug use is on the rise
again among our young people. The Crime Bill contains--all the crime bills
contain--more money for drug treatment, for criminal addicts, and boot
camps for youthful offenders that include incentives to get off drugs and
to stay off drugs. Our administration's budget, with all its cuts, contains
a large increase in funding for drug treatment and drug education. You must
pass them both. We need then desperately.

My fellow Americans, the problem of violence is an un-American problem. It
has no partisan or philosophical element. Therefore, I urge you find ways
as quickly as possible to set aside partisan differences and pass a strong,
smart, tough crime bill.

But further, I urge you to consider this: As you demand tougher penalties
for those who choose violence, let us also remember how we came to this sad
point. In our toughest neighborhoods, on our meanest streets, in our
poorest rural areas, we have seen a stunning and simultaneous breakdown of
community, family, and work, the heart and soul of civilized society. This
has created a vast vacuum which has been filled by violence and drugs and
gangs. So I ask you to remember that even as we say no to crime, we must
give people, especially our young people something to say yes to. Many of
our initiatives, from job training to welfare reform to health care to
national service will help to rebuild distressed communities, to strengthen
families, to provide work, but more needs to be done. That's what our
community empowerment agenda is all about--challenging businesses to
provide more investment through empowerment zones, ensuring banks will make
loans in the same communities their deposits come from, passing legislation
to unleash the power of capital through community development banks to
create jobs, opportunity, and hope where they're needed most.

But I think you know that to really solve this problem, we'll all have to
put our heads together, leave our ideological armor aside, and find some
new ideas to do even more.

The Role Of Government

And let's be honest, we all know something else, too. Our problems go way
beyond the reach of government. They're rooted in the loss of values and
the disappearance of work and the breakdown of our families and our
communities. My fellow Americans, we can cut the deficit, create jobs,
promote democracy around the world, pass welfare reform and health care,
pass the toughest crime bill in history and still leave too many of our
people behind.

The American people have got to want to change from within if we're going
to bring back work and family and community. We cannot renew our country
when, within a decade, more than half of the children will be born into
families where there has been no marriage. We cannot renew this country
when 13-year-old boys get semi-automatic weapons to shoot 9 year olds for
kicks. We can't renew our country when children are having children and the
fathers walk away as if the kids don't amount to anything. We can't renew
the country when our businesses eagerly look for new investments and new
customers abroad but ignore those people right here at home who'd give
anything to have their jobs and would gladly buy their products if they had
the money to do it.

We can't renew our country unless more of us--I mean all of us--are
willing to join the churches and the other good citizens, people like all
the black ministers I've worked with over the years or the priests and the
nuns I met at Our Lady of Help in East Los Angeles or my good friend Tony
Campolo in Philadelphia, unless we're willing to work with people like
that, people who are saving kids, adopting schools, making streets safer.
All of us can do that.

We can't renew our country until we realize that governments don't raise
children; parents do. Parents who know their children's teachers and turn
off the television and help with the homework and teach their kids right
from wrong--those kind of parents can make all the difference. I know. I
had one. And I'm telling you we have got to stop pointing our fingers at
these kids who have no future and reach our hands out to them. Our country
needs it. We need it. And they deserve it.

And so I say to you tonight let's give our children a future. Let us take
away their guns and give them books. Let us overcome their despair and
replace it with hope. Let us, by our example, teach them to obey the law,
respect our neighbors, and cherish our values. Let us weave these sturdy
threads into a new American community that once more stand strong against
the forces of despair and evil because everybody has a chance to walk into
a better tomorrow.

Oh, there will be naysayers who fear that we won't be equal to the
challenges of this time, but they misread our history, our heritage, even
today's headlines. All those things tell us we can and we will overcome any
challenge.

When the earth shook and fires raged in California; when I saw the
Mississippi deluge the farmlands of the Midwest in a 500 year flood; when
the century's bitterest cold swept from North Dakota to Newport News it
seemed as though the world itself was coming apart at the seams. But the
American people, they just came together. They rose to the occasion,
neighbor helping neighbor, strangers risking life and limb to stay total
strangers, showing the better angels of our nature.

Let us not reserve the better angels only for natural disasters, leaving
our deepest and most profound problems to petty political fighting.

Let us instead by true to our spirit, facing facts, coming together,
bringing hope and moving forward.

Tonight, my fellow Americans, we are summoned to answer a question as old
as the republic itself, what is the state of our union?

It is growing stronger but it must be stronger still. With your help and
God's help it will be.

Thank you and God Bless America.
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, members of the 104th Congress, my fellow
Americans:

Again we are here in the sanctuary of democracy. And once again, our
democracy has spoken.

So let me begin by congratulating all of you here in the 104th Congress,
and congratulating you, Mr. Speaker.

If we agree on nothing else tonight, we must agree that the American people
certainly voted for change in 1992 and in 1994.

And as I look out at you, I know how some of you must have felt in 1992.

I must say that in both years we didn't hear America singing, we heard
America shouting. And now all of us, Republicans and Democrats alike, must
say: We hear you. We will work together to earn the jobs you have given us.
For we are the keepers of the sacred trust and we must be faithful to it in
this new and very demanding era.

Over 200 years ago, our founders changed the entire course of human history
by joining together to create a new country based on a single, powerful
idea. We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal, endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights. Among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

It has fallen to every generation since then to preserve that idea--the
American idea--and to deepen and expand its meaning in new and different
times. To Lincoln and to his Congress, to preserve the Union and to end
slavery. To Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, to restrain the abuses
and excesses of the Industrial Revolution and to assert our leadership in
the world. To Franklin Roosevelt, to fight the failure and pain of the
Great Depression and to win our country's great struggle against fascism.

And to all our Presidents since, to fight the cold war. Especially, I
recall two who struggled to fight that cold war in partnership with
Congresses where the majority was of a different party. To Harry Truman,
who summoned us to unparalleled prosperity at home and who built the
architecture of the cold war. And to Ronald Reagan, whom we wish well
tonight, and who exhorted us to carry on until the twilight struggle
against Communism was won.

In another time of change and challenge, I had the honor to be the first
President to be elected in the post-cold-war era, an era marked by the
global economy, the information revolution, unparalleled change in
opportunity and in security for the American people.

I came to this hallowed chamber two years ago on a mission: To restore the
American dream for all our people and to make sure that we move into the
21st century still the strongest force for freedom and democracy in the
entire world.

I was determined then to tackle the tough problems too long ignored. In
this effort I am frank to say that I have made my mistakes. And I have
learned again the importance of humility in all human endeavor.

But I am also proud to say tonight that our country is stronger than it was
two years ago.

Accomplishments

Record numbers, record numbers of Americans are succeeding in the new
global economy. We are at peace, and we are a force for peace and freedom
throughout the world. We have almost six million new jobs since I became
President, and we have the lowest combined rate of unemployment and
inflation in 25 years.

Our businesses are more productive and here we have worked to bring the
deficit down, to expand trade, to put more police on our streets, to give
our citizens more of the tools they need to get an education and to rebuild
their own communities. But the rising tide is not lifting all the boats.

While our nation is enjoying peace and prosperity, too many of our people
are still working harder and harder for less and less. While our businesses
are restructuring and growing more productive and competitive, too many of
our people still can't be sure of having a job next year or even next
month. And far more than our material riches are threatened, things far
more precious to us: our children, our families, our values.

Our civil life is suffering in America today. Citizens are working together
less and shouting at each other more. The common bonds of community which
have been the great strength of our country from its very beginning are
badly frayed.

What are we to do about it?

More than 60 years ago at the dawn of another new era, President Roosevelt
told our nation new conditions impose new requirements on Government and
those who conduct Government. And from that simple proposition he shaped
the New Deal, which helped to restore our nation to prosperity and defined
the relationship between our people and their Government for half a
century.

That approach worked in its time but today we face a very different time
and very different conditions. We are moving from an industrial age built
on gears and sweat to an information age demanding skills and learning and
flexibility.

Our Government, once a champion of national purpose, is now seen by many as
simply a captive of narrow interests putting more burdens on our citizens
rather than equipping them to get ahead. The values that used to hold us
all together seem to be coming apart.

So tonight we must forge a new social compact to meet the challenges of
this time. As we enter a new era, we need a new set of understandings not
just with Government but, even more important, with one another as
Americans.

New Covenant

That's what I want to talk with you about tonight. I call it the New
Covenant but it's grounded in a very, very old idea that all Americans have
not just a right but a solemn responsibility to rise as far as their
God-given talents and determination can take them. And to give something
back to their communities and their country in return.

Opportunity and responsibility--they go hand in hand; we can't have one
without the other, and our national community can't hold together without
both.

Our New Covenant is a new set of understandings for how we can equip our
people to meet the challenges of the new economy, how we can change the way
our Government works to fit a different time and, above all, how we can
repair the damaged bonds in our society and come together behind our common
purpose. We must have dramatic change in our economy, our Government and
ourselves.

My fellow Americans, without regard to party, let us rise to the occasion.
Let us put aside partisanship and pettiness and pride. As we embark on this
course, let us put our country first, remembering that regardless of party
label we are all Americans. And let the final test of everything we do be a
simple one: Is it good for the American people?

Let me begin by saying that we cannot ask Americans to be better citizens
if we are not better servants. You made a good start by passing that law
which applies to Congress all the laws you put on the private sector--and
I was proud to sign it yesterday.

But we have a lot more to do before people really trust the way things work
around here. Three times as many lobbyists are in the streets and corridors
of Washington as were here 20 years ago. The American people look at their
capital and they see a city where the well-connected and the well-protected
can work the system, but the interests of ordinary citizens are often left
out.

As the new Congress opened its doors, lobbyists were still doing business
as usual--the gifts, the trips--all the things that people are concerned
about haven't stopped.

Twice this month you missed opportunities to stop these practices. I know
there were other considerations in those votes, but I want to use something
that I've heard my Republican friends say from time to time: There doesn't
have to be a law for everything.

So tonight I ask you to just stop taking the lobbyists' perks, just stop.

We don't have to wait for legislation to pass to send a strong signal to
the American people that things are really changing. But I also hope you
will send me the strongest possible lobby reform bill, and I'll sign that,
too. We should require lobbyists to tell the people for whom they work what
they're spending, what they want. We should also curb the role of big money
in elections by capping the cost of campaigns and limiting the influence of
PAC's.

And as I have said for three years, we should work to open the air waves so
that they can be an instrument of democracy not a weapon of destruction by
giving free TV time to candidates for public office.

When the last Congress killed political reform last year, it was reported
in the press that the lobbyists actually stood in the halls of this sacred
building and cheered. This year, let's give the folks at home something to
cheer about.

More important, I think we all agree that we have to change the way the
Government works. Let's make it smaller, less costly and smarter. Leaner
not meaner.

I just told the Speaker the equal time doctrine's alive and well.

The Role Of Government

The New Covenant approach to governing is as different from the old
bureaucratic way as the computer is from the manual typewriter. The old way
of governing around here protected organized interests; we should look out
for the interests of ordinary people. The old way divided us by interests,
constituency or class; the New Covenant way should unite us behind a common
vision of what's best for our country.

The old way dispensed services through large, top-down, inflexible
bureaucracies. The New Covenant way should shift these resources and
decision making from bureaucrats to citizens, injecting choice and
competition and individual responsibility into national policy.

The old way of governing around here actually seemed to reward failure. The
New Covenant way should have built-in incentives to reward success.

The old way was centralized here in Washington. The New Covenant way must
take hold in the communities all across America, and we should help them to
do that.

Our job here is to expand opportunity, not bureaucracy, to empower people
to make the most of their own lives and to enhance our security here at
home and abroad.

We must not ask Government to do what we should do for ourselves. We should
rely on Government as a partner to help us to do more for ourselves and for
each other.

I hope very much that as we debate these specific and exciting matters, we
can go beyond the sterile discussion between the illusion that there is
somehow a program for every problem, on the one hand, and the other
illusion that the Government is the source of every problem that we have.

Our job is to get rid of yesterday's Government so that our own people can
meet today's and tomorrow's needs.

And we ought to do it together.

You know, for years before I became President, I heard others say they
would cut Government and how bad it was. But not much happened.

We actually did it. We cut over a quarter of a trillion dollars in
spending, more than 300 domestic programs, more than 100,000 positions from
the Federal bureaucracy in the last two years alone.

Based on decisions already made, we will have cut a total of more than a
quarter of a million positions from the Federal Government, making it the
smallest it has been since John Kennedy was president, by the time I come
here again next year.

Under the leadership of Vice President Gore, our initiatives have already
saved taxpayers $ 63 billion. The age of the $ 500 hammer and the ashtray
you can break on David Letterman is gone. Deadwood programs like mohair
subsidies are gone. We've streamlined the Agriculture Department by
reducing it by more than 1,200 offices. We've slashed the small-business
loan form from an inch thick to a single page. We've thrown away the
Government's 10,000-page personnel manual.

And the Government is working better in important ways. FEMA, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, has gone from being a disaster to helping
people in disaster.

You can ask the farmers in the Middle West who fought the flood there or
the people in California who've dealt with floods and earthquakes and fires
and they'll tell you that.

Government workers, working hand-in-hand with private business, rebuilt
Southern California's fractured freeways in record time and under budget.

And because the Federal Government moved fast, all but one of the 5,600
schools damaged in the earthquake are back in business.

Now, there are a lot of other things that I could talk about. I want to
just mention one because it'll be discussed here in the next few weeks.

University administrators all over the country have told me that they are
saving weeks and weeks of bureaucratic time now because of our direct
college loan program, which makes college loans cheaper and more affordable
with better repayment terms for students, costs the Government less and
cuts out paperwork and bureaucracy for the Government and for the
universities.

We shouldn't cap that program, we should give every college in America the
opportunity to be a part of it.

Previous Government programs gather dust; the reinventing Government report
is getting results. And we're not through--there's going to be a second
round of reinventing Government.

We propose to cut $ 130 billion in spending by shrinking departments,
extending our freeze on domestic spending, cutting 60 public housing
programs down to 3, getting rid of over a hundred programs we do not need
like the Interstate Commerce Commission and the Helium Reserve Program.

And we're working on getting rid of unnecessary regulations and making them
more sensible. The programs and regulations that have outlived their
usefulness should go. We have to cut yesterday's Government to help solve
tomorrow's problems.

And we need to get Government closer to the people it's meant to serve. We
need to help move programs down to the point where states and communities
and private citizens in the private sector can do a better job. If they can
do it, we ought to let them do it. We should get out of the way and let
them do what they can do better.

Community Empowerment

Taking power away from Federal bureaucracies and giving it back to
communities and individuals is something everyone should be able to be for.
It's time for Congress to stop passing onto the states the cost of
decisions we make here in Washington.

I know there are still serious differences over the details of the unfunded
mandates legislation but I want to work with you to make sure we pass a
reasonable bill which will protect the national interest and give justified
relief where we need to give it.

For years, Congress concealed in the budget scores of pet spending
projects. Last year was no different. There was a million dollars to study
stress in plants and $ 12 million for a tick removal program that didn't
work. It's hard to remove ticks; those of us who've had them know.

But I'll tell you something, if you'll give me the line-item veto, I'll
remove some of that unnecessary spending.

But, I think we should all remember, and almost all of us would agree, that
Government still has important responsibilities.

Our young people--we should think of this when we cut--our young people
hold our future in their hands. We still owe a debt to our veterans. And
our senior citizens have made us what we are.

Budget

Now, my budget cuts a lot. But it protects education, veterans, Social
Security and Medicare, and I hope you will do the same thing. You should,
and I hope you will.

And when we give more flexibility to the states, let us remember that there
are certain fundamental national needs that should be addressed in every
state, north and south, east and west.

Immunization against childhood disease, school lunches in all our schools,
Head Start, medical care and nutrition for pregnant women and infants--all
these things are in the national interest.

I applaud your desire to get rid of costly and unnecessary regulations, but
when we deregulate let's remember what national action in the national
interest has given us: safer food for our families, safer toys for our
children, safer nursing homes for our parents, safer cars and highways and
safer workplaces, cleaner air and cleaner water. Do we need common sense
and fairness in our regulations? You bet we do. But we can have common
sense and still provide for safe drinking water. We can have fairness and
still clean up toxic dumps and we ought to do it.

Should we cut the deficit more? Well of course we should. Of course we
should. But we can bring it down in a way that still protects our economic
recovery and does not unduly punish people who should not be punished, but
instead should be helped.

I know many of you in this chamber support the balanced-budget amendment. I
certainly want to balance the budget. Our Administration has done more to
bring the budget down and to save money than any in a very, very long
time.

If you believe passing this amendment is the right thing to do, then you
have to be straight with the American people. They have a right to know
what you're going to cut, what taxes you're going to raise, how it's going
to affect them.

And we should be doing things in the open around here. For example,
everybody ought to know if this proposal is going to endanger Social
Security. I would oppose that, and I think most Americans would.

Welfare

Nothing is done more to undermine our sense of common responsibility than
our failed welfare system. This is one of the problems we have to face here
in Washington in our New Covenant. It rewards welfare over work, it
undermines family values, it lets millions of parents get away without
paying their child support, it keeps a minority--but a significant
minority--of the people on welfare trapped on it for a very long time.

I worked on this problem for a long time--nearly 15 years now. As a
Governor I had the honor of working with the Reagan Administration to write
the last welfare reform bill back in 1988.

In the last two years we made a good start in continuing the work of
welfare reform. Our Administration gave two dozen states the right to slash
through Federal rules and regulations to reform their own welfare systems
and to try to promote work and responsibility over welfare and dependency.

Last year, I introduced the most sweeping welfare reform plan ever
presented by an Administration. We have to make welfare what it was meant
to be--a second chance, not a way of life.

We have to help those on welfare move to work as quickly as possible, to
provide child care and teach them skills, if that's what they need, for up
to two years. But after that, there ought to be a simple, hard rule. Anyone
who can work must go to work.

If a parent isn't paying child support, they should be forced to pay.

We should suspend driver's licenses, track them across state lines, make
them work off what they owe. That is what we should do. Governments do not
raise children, people do. And the parents must take responsibility for the
children they bring into this world.

I want to work with you, with all of you, to pass welfare reform. But our
goal must be to liberate people and lift them from dependence to
independence, from welfare to work, from mere childbearing to responsible
parenting. Our goal should not be to punish them because they happen to be
poor.

We should--we should require work and mutual responsibility. But we
shouldn't cut people off just because they're poor, they're young or even
because they're unmarried. We should promote responsibility by requiring
young mothers to live at home with their parents or in other supervised
settings, by requiring them to finish school. But we shouldn't put them and
their children out on the street.

And I know all the arguments pro and con and I have read and thought about
this for a long time: I still don't think we can, in good conscience,
punish poor children for the mistakes of their parents.

My fellow Americans, every single survey shows that all the American people
care about this, without regard to party or race or region. So let this be
the year we end welfare as we know it.

But also let this be the year that we are all able to stop using this issue
to divide America.

No one is more eager to end welfare.

I may be the only President who's actually had the opportunity to sit in
the welfare office, who's actually spent hours and hours talking to people
on welfare, and I am telling you the people who are trapped on it know it
doesn't work. They also want to get off.

So we can promote, together, education and work and good parenting. I have
no problem with punishing bad behavior or the refusal to be a worker or a
student or a responsible parent. I just don't want to punish poverty and
past mistakes. All of us have made our mistakes and none of us can change
our yesterdays, but every one of us can change our tomorrows.

And America's best example of that may be Lynn Woolsey, who worked her way
off welfare to become a Congresswoman from the state of California.

Crime

I know the members of this Congress are concerned about crime, as are all
the citizens of our country. But I remind you that last year we passed a
very tough crime bill--longer sentences, three strikes and you're out,
almost 60 new capital punishment offenses, more prisons, more prevention,
100,000 more police--and we paid for it all by reducing the size of the
Federal bureaucracy and giving the money back to local communities to lower
the crime rate.

There may be other things we can do to be tougher on crime, to be smarter
with crime, to help to lower that rate first. Well if there are, let's talk
about them and let's do them. But let's not go back on the things that we
did last year that we know work--that we know work because the local
law-enforcement officers tell us that we did the right thing. Because local
community leaders, who've worked for years and years to lower the crime
rate, tell us that they work.

Let's look at the experience of our cities and our rural areas where the
crime rate has gone down and ask the people who did it how they did it and
if what we did last year supports the decline in the crime rate, and I am
convinced that it does, let us not go back on it, let's stick with it,
implement it--we've got four more hard years of work to do to do that.

I don't want to destroy the good atmosphere in the room or in the country
tonight, but I have to mention one issue that divided this body greatly
last year. The last Congress also passed the Brady bill and in the crime
bill the ban on 19 assault weapons.

I don't think it's a secret to anybody in this room that several members of
the last Congress who voted for that aren't here tonight because they voted
for it. And I know, therefore, that some of you that are here because they
voted for it are under enormous pressure to repeal it. I just have to tell
you how I feel about it.

The members who voted for that bill and I would never do anything to
infringe on the right to keep and bear arms to hunt and to engage in other
appropriate sporting activities. I've done it since I was a boy, and I'm
going to keep right on doing it until I can't do it anymore.

But a lot of people laid down their seats in Congress so that police
officers and kids wouldn't have to lay down their lives under a hail of
assault-weapon attacks, and I will not let that be repealed. I will not let
it be repealed.

I'd like to talk about a couple of other issues we have to deal with. I
want us to cut more spending, but I hope we won't cut Government programs
that help to prepare us for the new economy, promote responsibility and are
organized from the grass roots up, not by Federal bureaucracy.

The very best example of this is the National Service Corps--AmeriCorps.
It passed with strong bipartisan support and now there are 20,000 Americans
--more than ever served in one year in the Peace Corps--working all over
this country, helping person to person in local grass-roots volunteer
groups, solving problems and in the process earning some money for their
education.

This is citizenship at its best. It's good for the AmeriCorps members, but
it's good for the rest of us, too. It's the essence of the New Covenant and
we shouldn't stop it.

Illegal Immigration

All Americans, not only in the states most heavily affected, but in every
place in this country are rightly disturbed by the large numbers of illegal
aliens entering our country.

The jobs they hold might otherwise be held by citizens or legal immigrants.
The public services they use impose burdens on our taxpayers. That's why
our Administration has moved aggressively to secure our borders more, by
hiring a record number of new border guards, by deporting twice as many
criminal aliens as ever before, by cracking down on illegal hiring, by
barring welfare benefits to illegal aliens.

In the budget I will present to you, we will try to do more to speed the
deportation of illegal aliens who are arrested for crimes, to better
identify illegal aliens in the workplace as recommended by the commission
headed by former Congresswoman Barbara Jordan.

We are a nation of immigrants, but we are also a nation of laws. It is
wrong and ultimately self-defeating for a nation of immigrants to permit
the kind of abuse of our immigration laws we have seen in recent years, and
we must do more to stop it.

The most important job of our Government in this new era is to empower the
American people to succeed in the global economy. America has always been a
land of opportunity, a land where, if you work hard, you can get ahead.
We've become a great middle-class country; middle-class values sustain us.
We must expand that middle class and shrink the underclass even as we do
everything we can to support the millions of Americans who are already
successful in the new economy.

America is once again the world's strongest economic power: almost six
million new jobs in the last two years, exports booming, inflation down,
high-wage jobs are coming back. A record number of American entrepreneurs
are living the American dream.

If we want it to stay that way, those who work and lift our nation must
have more of its benefits.

Today, too many of those people are being left out. They're working harder
for less. They have less security, less income, less certainty that they
can even afford a vacation, much less college for their kids or retirement
for themselves.

We cannot let this continue. If we don't act, our economy will probably
keep doing what it's been doing since about 1978, when the income growth
began to go to those at the very top of our economic scale. And the people
in the vast middle got very little growth and people who worked like crazy
but were on the bottom then, fell even further and further behind in the
years afterward, no matter how hard they worked.

We've got to have a Government that can be a real partner in making this
new economy work for all of our people, a Government that helps each and
every one of us to get an education and to have the opportunity to renew
our skills.

Education

That's why we worked so hard to increase educational opportunities in the
last two years from Head Start to public schools to apprenticeships for
young people who don't go to college, to making college loans more
available and more affordable.

That's the first thing we have to do: We've got to do something to empower
people to improve their skills.

Taxes

Second thing we ought to do is to help people raise their incomes
immediately by lowering their taxes.

We took the first step in 1993 with a working family tax cut for 15 million
families with incomes under $ 27,000, a tax cut that this year will average
about $ 1,000 a family.

And we also gave tax reductions to most small and new businesses. Before we
could do more than that, we first had to bring down the deficit we
inherited and we had to get economic growth up. Now we've done both, and
now we can cut taxes in a more comprehensive way.

But tax cuts should reinforce and promote our first obligation: to empower
our citizens through education and training to make the most of their own
lives. The spotlight should shine on those who make the right choices for
themselves, their families and their communities.

Middle Class Bill Of Rights

I have proposed a middle-class bill of rights, which should properly be
called the bill of rights and responsibilities, because its provisions only
benefit those who are working to educate and raise their children and to
educate themselves. It will, therefore, give needed tax relief and raise
incomes, in both the short run and the long run, in a way that benefits all
of us.

There are four provisions:

First, a tax deduction for all education and training after high school. If
you think about it, we permit businesses to deduct their investment, we
permit individuals to deduct interest on their home mortgages, but today an
education is even more important to the economic well-being of our whole
country than even those things are. We should do everything we can to
encourage it, and I hope you will support it.

Second, we ought to cut taxes $ 500 for families with children under 13.

Third, we ought to foster more savings and personal responsibility by
permitting people to establish an individual retirement account and
withdraw from it tax free for the cost of education, health care,
first-time home buying or the care of a parent.

And fourth, we should pass a G.I. bill for America's workers. We propose to
collapse nearly 70 Federal programs and not give the money to the states
but give the money directly to the American people, offer vouchers to them
so that they--if they're laid off or if they're working for a very low
wage--can get a voucher worth $ 2,600 a year for up to two years to go to
their local community colleges or wherever else they want to get the skills
they need to improve their lives. Let's empower people in this way. Move it
from the Government directly to the workers of America.

Cutting The Deficit Now

Any one of us can call for a tax cut, but I won't accept one that explodes
the deficit or puts our recovery at risk. We ought to pay for our tax cuts
fully and honestly. Just two years ago it was an open question whether we
would find the strength to cut the deficit.

Thanks to the courage of the people who were here then, many of whom didn't
return, we did cut the deficit. We began to do what others said would not
be done: We cut the deficit by over $ 600 billion, about $ 10,000 for every
family in this country. It's coming down three years in a row for the first
time since Mr. Truman was President and I don't think anybody in America
wants us to let it explode again.

In the budget I will send you, the middle-class bill of rights is fully
paid for by budget cuts in bureaucracy, cuts in programs, cuts in special
interest subsidies. And the spending cuts will more than double the tax
cuts. My budget pays for the middle-class bill of rights without any cuts
in Medicare, and I will oppose any attempts to pay for tax cuts with
Medicare cuts. That's not the right thing to do.

I know that a lot of you have your own ideas about tax relief. And some of
them, I find quite interesting. I really want to work with all of you.

My tests for our proposals will be: Will it create jobs and raise incomes?
Will it strengthen our families and support our children? Is it paid for?
Will it build the middle class and shrink the underclass?

If it does, I'll support it. But if it doesn't, I won't.

Minimum Wage

The goal of building the middle class and shrinking the underclass is also
why I believe that you should raise the minimum wage.

It rewards work--two and a half million Americans, often women with
children, are working out there today for four-and-a-quarter an hour. In
terms of real buying power, by next year, that minimum wage will be at a
40-year low. That's not my idea of how the new economy ought to work.

Now I studied the arguments and the evidence for and against a minimum-wage
increase. I believe the weight of the evidence is that a modest increase
does not cost jobs and may even lure people back into the job market. But
the most important thing is you can't make a living on $ 4.25 an hour. Now
--especially if you have children, even with the working families tax cut
we passed last year.

In the past, the minimum wage has been a bipartisan issue and I think it
should be again. So I want to challenge you to have honest hearings on
this, to get together to find a way to make the minimum wage a living
wage.

Members of Congress have been here less than a month but by the end of the
week--28 days into the new year--every member of Congress will have
earned as much in congressional salary as a minimum-wage worker makes all
year long.

Everybody else here, including the President, has something else that too
many Americans do without and that's health care.

Health Care

Now, last year we almost came to blows over health care, but we didn't do
anything. And the cold, hard fact is that since last year--since I was
here--another 1.1 million Americans in working families have lost their
health care. And the cold, hard fact is that many millions more--most of
them farmers and small business people and self-employed people--have
seen their premiums skyrocket, their co-pays and deductibles go up.

There's a whole bunch of people in this country that in the statistics have
health insurance but really what they've got is a piece of paper that says
they won't lose their home if they get sick.

Now I still believe our country has got to move toward providing health
security for every American family, but--but I know that last year, as the
evidence indicates, we bit off more than we could chew.

So I'm asking you that we work together. Let's do it step by step. Let's do
whatever we have to do to get something done. Let's at least pass
meaningful insurance reform so that no American risks losing coverage for
facing skyrocketing prices but that nobody loses their coverage because
they face high prices or unavailable insurance when they change jobs or
lose a job or a family member gets sick.

I want to work together with all of you who have an interest in this: with
the Democrats who worked on it last time, with the Republican leaders like
Senator Dole who has a longtime commitment to health care reform and made
some constructive proposals in this area last year. We ought to make sure
that self-employed people in small businesses can buy insurance at more
affordable rates through voluntary purchasing pools. We ought to help
families provide long-term care for a sick parent to a disabled child. We
can work to help workers who lose their jobs at least keep their health
insurance coverage for a year while they look for work, and we can find a
way--it may take some time, but we can find a way--to make sure that our
children have health care.

You know, I think everybody in this room, without regard to party, can be
proud of the fact that our country was rated as having the world's most
productive economy for the first time in nearly a decade, but we can't be
proud of the fact that we're the only wealthy country in the world that has
a smaller percentage of the work force and their children with health
insurance today than we did 10 years ago--the last time we were the most
productive economy in the world.

So let's work together on this. It is too important for politics as usual.

Much of what the American people are thinking about tonight is what we've
already talked about. A lot of people think that the security concerns of
America today are entirely internal to our borders, they relate to the
security of our jobs and our homes and our incomes and our children, our
streets, our health and protecting those borders.

Foreign Policy

Now that the Cold War has passed, it's tempting to believe that all the
security issues, with the possible exception of trade, reside here at home.
But it's not so. Our security still depends on our continued world
leadership for peace and freedom and democracy. We still can't be strong at
home unless we're strong abroad.

Mexico

The financial crisis in Mexico is a case in point. I know it's not popular
to say it tonight but we have to act, not for the Mexican people but for
the sake of the millions of Americans whose livelihoods are tied to
Mexico's well-being. If we want to secure American jobs, preserve American
exports, safeguard America's borders then we must pass the stabilization
program and help to put Mexico back on track.

Now let me repeat: it's not a loan, it's not foreign aid, it's not a
bail-out. We'll be given a guarantee like co-signing a note with good
collateral that will cover our risk.

This legislation is the right thing for America. That's why the bipartisan
leadership has supported it. And I hope you in Congress will pass it
quickly. It is in our interest and we can explain it to the American
people, because we're going to do it in the right way.

Russia

You know, tonight this is the first State of the Union address ever
delivered since the beginning of the cold war when not a single Russian
missile is pointed at the children of America.

And along with the Russians, we're on our way to destroying the missiles
and the bombers that carry 9,000 nuclear warheads. We've come so far so
fast in this post-cold-war world that it's easy to take the decline of the
nuclear threat for granted. But it's still there, and we aren't finished
yet.

This year, I'll ask the Senate to approve START II to eliminate weapons
that carry 5,000 more warheads. The United States will lead the charge to
extend indefinitely the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, to enact a
comprehensive nuclear test ban, and to eliminate chemical weapons.

North Korea

To stop and roll back North Korea's potentially deadly nuclear program,
we'll continue to implement the agreement we have reached with that nation.
It's smart, it's tough, it's a deal based on continuing inspection with
safeguards for our allies and ourselves.

This year, I'll submit to Congress comprehensive legislation to strengthen
our hand in combating terrorists, whether they strike at home or abroad. As
the cowards who bombed the World Trade Center found out, this country will
hunt down terrorists and bring them to justice.

Middle East

Just this week, another horrendous terrorist act in Israel killed 19 and
injured scores more. On behalf of the American people and all of you, I
send our deepest sympathy to the families of the victims. I know that in
the face of such evil, it is hard for the people in the Middle East to go
forward. But the terrorists represent the past, not the future. We must and
we will pursue a comprehensive peace between Israel and all her neighbors
in the Middle East.

Accordingly, last night I signed an executive order that will block the
assets in the United States of terrorist organizations that threaten to
disrupt the peace process. It prohibits financial transactions with these
groups.

And tonight I call on all our allies in peace-loving nations throughout the
world to join us with renewed fervor in a global effort to combat
terrorism, we cannot permit the future to be marred by terror and fear and
paralysis.

Defense

From the day I took the oath of office, I pledged that our nation would
maintain the best-equipped, best-trained and best-prepared military on
earth. We have and they are. They have managed the dramatic downsizing of
our forces after the cold war with remarkable skill and spirit. But to make
sure our military is ready for action and to provide the pay and the
quality of life the military and their families deserve, I'm asking the
Congress to add $ 25 billion in defense spending over the next six years.

I have visited many bases at home and around the world since I became
President. Tonight I repeat that request with renewed conviction. We ask a
very great deal of our armed forces. Now that they are smaller in number,
we ask more of them. They go out more often to more different places and
stay longer. They are called to service in many, many ways, and we must
give them and their families what the times demand and what they have
earned.

Just think about what our troops have done in the last year, showing
America at its best, helping to save hundreds of thousands of people in
Rwanda, moving with lightning speed to head off another threat to Kuwait,
giving freedom and democracy back to the people of Haiti.

We have proudly supported peace and prosperity and freedom from South
Africa to Northern Ireland, from Central and Eastern Europe to Asia, from
Latin America to the Middle East. All these endeavors are good in those
places but they make our future more confident and more secure.

Well, my fellow Americans, that's my agenda for America's future: expanding
opportunity not bureaucracy, enhancing security at home and abroad,
empowering our people to make the most of their own lives.

It's ambitious and achievable. But it's not enough.

We even need more than new ideas for changing the world or equipping
Americans to compete in the new economy, more than a Government that's
smaller, smarter and wiser, more than all the changes we can make in
Government and in the private sector from the outside in.

Values And Voices

Our fortunes and our prosperity also depend upon our ability to answer some
questions from within--from the values and voices that speak to our hearts
as well as our heads, voices that tell us we have to do more to accept
responsibility for ourselves and our families, for our communities, and
yes, for our fellow citizens.

We see our families and our communities all over this country coming apart.
And we feel the common ground shifting from under us. The PTA, the town
hall meeting, the ball park--it's hard for a lot of overworked parents to
find the time and space for those things that strengthen the bonds of trust
and cooperation.

Too many of our children don't even have parents and grandparents who can
give them those experiences that they need to build their own character and
their sense of identity. We all know that while we here in this chamber can
make a difference on those things, that the real differences will be made
by our fellow citizens where they work and where they live.

And it'll be made almost without regard to party. When I used to go to the
softball park in Little Rock to watch my daughter's league and people would
come up to me--fathers and mothers--and talk to me, I can honestly say I
had no idea whether 90 percent of them were Republicans or Democrats.

When I visited the relief centers after the floods in California, Northern
California, last week, a woman came up to me and did something that very
few of you would do. She hugged me and said, "Mr. President, I'm a
Republican, but I'm glad you're here."

Now, why? We can't wait for disasters to act the way we used to act every
day. Because as we move into this next century, everybody matters. We don't
have a person to waste. And a lot of people are losing a lot of chances to
do better.

That means that we need a New Covenant for everybody--for our corporate
and business leaders, we're going to work here to keep bringing the deficit
down, to expand markets, to support their success in every possible way.
But they have an obligation: when they're doing well, to keep jobs in our
communities and give their workers a fair share of the prosperity they
generate.

For people in the entertainment industry in this country, we applaud your
creativity and your worldwide success and we support your freedom of
expression but you do have a responsibility to assess the impact of your
work and to understand the damage that comes from the incessant,
repetitive, mindless violence and irresponsible conduct that permeates our
media all the time.

We've got to ask our community leaders and all kinds of organizations to
help us stop our most serious social problem: the epidemic of teen
pregnancies and births where there is no marriage. I have sent to Congress
a plan to target schools all over this country with anti-pregnancy programs
that work. But government can only do so much. Tonight, I call on parents
and leaders all across this country to join together in a national campaign
against teen pregnancy to make a difference. We can do this and we must.

And I would like to say a special word to our religious leaders. You know,
I'm proud of the fact that the United States has more house of worship per
capita than any country in the world. These people, who lead our houses of
worship, can ignite their congregations to carry their faith into action,
can reach out to all of our children, to all of the people in distress, to
those who have been savaged by the breakdown of all we hold dear, because
so much of what must be done must come from the inside out. And our
religious leaders and their congregations can make all the difference. They
have a role in the New Covenant as well.

There must be more responsibility for all of our citizens. You know it
takes a lot of people to help all the kids in trouble stay off the streets
and in school. It takes a lot of people to build the Habitat for Humanity
houses that the Speaker celebrates on his lapel pin. It takes a lot of
people to provide the people power for all the civic organizations in this
country that made our communities mean so much to most of us when we were
kids. It takes every parent to teach the children the difference between
right and wrong and to encourage them to learn and grow and to say no to
the wrong things but also to believe that they can be whatever they want to
be.

I know it's hard when you're working harder for less, when you're under
great stress, to do these things. A lot of our people don't have the time
or the emotional stress they think to do the work of citizenship. Most of
us in politics haven't helped very much. For years, we've mostly treated
citizens like they were consumers or spectators, sort of political couch
potatoes who were supposed to watch the TV ads--either promise them
something for nothing or play on their fears and frustrations. And more and
more of our citizens now get most of their information in very negative and
aggressive ways that is hardly conducive to honest and open conversations.
But the truth is we have got to stop seeing each other as enemies just
because we have different views.

If you go back to the beginning of this country, the great strength of
America, as de Tocqueville pointed out when he came here a long time ago,
has always been our ability to associate with people who were different
from ourselves and to work together to find common ground. And in this day
everybody has a responsibility to do more of that. We simply cannot wait
for a tornado, a fire or a flood to behave like Americans ought to behave
in dealing with one another.

I want to finish up here by pointing out some folks that are up with the
First Lady that represent what I'm trying to talk about. Citizens. I have
no idea what their party affiliation is or who they voted for in the last
election, but they represent what we ought to be doing.

Cindy Perry teaches second-graders to read in AmeriCorps in rural Kentucky.
She gains when she gives. She's a mother of four.

She says that her service inspired her to get her high school equivalency
last year. She was married when she was a teen-ager. Stand up, Cindy. She
married when she was a teen-ager. She had four children, but she had time
to serve other people, to get her high school equivalency and she's going
to use her AmeriCorps money to go back to college.

Steven Bishop is the police chief of Kansas City. He's been a national
leader--stand up Steve. He's been a national leader in using more police
in community policing and he's worked with AmeriCorps to do it, and the
crime rate in Kansas City has gone down as a result of what he did.

Cpl. Gregory Depestre went to Haiti as part of his adopted country's force
to help secure democracy in his native land. And I might add we must be the
only country in the world that could have gone to Haiti and taken
Haitian-Americans there who could speak the language and talk to the
people, and he was one of them and we're proud of him.

The next two folks I've had the honor of meeting and getting to know a
little bit. The Rev. John and the Rev. Diana Cherry of the A.M.E. Zion
Church in Temple Hills, Md. I'd like to ask them to stand. I want to tell
you about them. In the early 80's they left Government service and formed a
church in a small living room in a small house in the early 80's. Today
that church has 17,000 members. It is one of the three or four biggest
churches in the entire United States. It grows by 200 a month.

They do it together. And the special focus of their ministry is keeping
families together. They are--Two things they did make a big impression on
me. I visited their church once and I learned they were building a new
sanctuary closer to the Washington, D.C., line, in a higher-crime,
higher-drug-rate area because they thought it was part of their ministry to
change the lives of the people who needed them. Second thing I want to say
is that once Reverend Cherry was at a meeting at the White House with some
other religious leaders and he left early to go back to his church to
minister to 150 couples that he had brought back to his church from all
over America to convince them to come back together to save their marriages
and to raise their kids. This is the kind of work that citizens are doing
in America. We need more of it and it ought to be lifted up and supported.

The last person I want to introduce is Jack Lucas from Hattiesburg,
Mississippi. Jack, would you stand up. Fifty years ago in the sands of Iwo
Jima, Jack Lucas taught and learned the lessons of citizenship. On February
the 20th, 1945, he and three of his buddies encountered the enemy and two
grenades at their feet. Jack Lucas threw himself on both of them. In that
moment he saved the lives of his companions and miraculously in the next
instant a medic saved his life. He gained a foothold for freedom and at the
age of 17, just a year older than his grandson, who's up there with him
today, and his son, who is a West Point graduate and a veteran, at 17, Jack
Lucas became the youngest marine in history and the youngest soldier in
this century to win the Congressional Medal of Honor. All these years
later, yesterday, here's what he said about that day: Didn't matter where
you were from or who you were. You relied on one another. You did it for
your country. We all gain when we give and we reap what we sow. That's at
the heart of this New Covenant. Responsibility, opportunity and
citizenship.

More than stale chapters in some remote civic book they're still the virtue
by which we can fulfill ourselves and reach our God-given potential and be
like them. And also to fulfill the eternal promise of this country, the
enduring dream from that first and most-sacred covenant. I believe every
person in this country still believes that we are created equal and given
by our creator the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

This is a very, very great country and our best days are still to come.
Thank you and God bless you all.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of the 104th Congress,
distinguished guests, my fellow Americans all across our land:

Let me begin tonight by saying to our men and women in uniform around the
world, and especially those helping peace take root in Bosnia and to their
families, I thank you. America is very, very proud of you.

My duty tonight is to report on the state of the Union--not the state of
our government, but of our American community; and to set forth our
responsibilities, in the words of our Founders, to form a more perfect
union.

The state of the Union is strong. Our economy is the healthiest it has been
in three decades. We have the lowest combined rates of unemployment and
inflation in 27 years. We have created nearly 8 million new jobs, over a
million of them in basic industries, like construction and automobiles.
America is selling more cars than Japan for the first time since the 1970s.
And for three years in a row, we have had a record number of new businesses
started in our country.

Our leadership in the world is also strong, bringing hope for new peace.
And perhaps most important, we are gaining ground in restoring our
fundamental values. The crime rate, the welfare and food stamp rolls, the
poverty rate and the teen pregnancy rate are all down. And as they go down,
prospects for America's future go up.

We live in an age of possibility. A hundred years ago we moved from farm to
factory. Now we move to an age of technology, information, and global
competition. These changes have opened vast new opportunities for our
people, but they have also presented them with stiff challenges. While more
Americans are living better, too many of our fellow citizens are working
harder just to keep up, and they are rightly concerned about the security
of their families.

The Role Of Government

We must answer here three fundamental questions: First, how do we make the
American Dream of opportunity for all a reality for all Americans who are
willing to work for it? Second, how do we preserve our old and enduring
values as we move into the future? And, third, how do we meet these
challenges together, as one America?

We know big government does not have all the answers. We know there's not a
program for every problem. We have worked to give the American people a
smaller, less bureaucratic government in Washington. And we have to give
the American people one that lives within its means.

The era of big government is over. But we cannot go back to the time when
our citizens were left to fend for themselves. Instead, we must go forward
as one America, one nation working together to meet the challenges we face
together. Self-reliance and teamwork are not opposing virtues; we must have
both.

I believe our new, smaller government must work in an old-fashioned
American way, together with all of our citizens through state and local
governments, in the workplace, in religious, charitable and civic
associations. Our goal must be to enable all our people to make the most of
their own lives--with stronger families, more educational opportunity,
economic security, safer streets, a cleaner environment in a safer world.

To improve the state of our Union, we must ask more of ourselves, we must
expect more of each other, and we must face our challenges together.

Here, in this place, our responsibility begins with balancing the budget in
a way that is fair to all Americans. There is now broad bipartisan
agreement that permanent deficit spending must come to an end.

I compliment the Republican leadership and the membership for the energy
and determination you have brought to this task of balancing the budget.
And I thank the Democrats for passing the largest deficit reduction plan in
history in 1993, which has already cut the deficit nearly in half in three
years.

Deficit

Since 1993, we have all begun to see the benefits of deficit reduction.
Lower interest rates have made it easier for businesses to borrow and to
invest and to create new jobs. Lower interest rates have brought down the
cost of home mortgages, car payments and credit card rates to ordinary
citizens. Now, it is time to finish the job and balance the budget.

Though differences remain among us which are significant, the combined
total of the proposed savings that are common to both plans is more than
enough, using the numbers from your Congressional Budget Office to balance
the budget in seven years and to provide a modest tax cut.

These cuts are real. They will require sacrifice from everyone. But these
cuts do not undermine our fundamental obligations to our parents, our
children, and our future, by endangering Medicare, or Medicaid, or
education, or the environment, or by raising taxes on working families.

I have said before, and let me say again, many good ideas have come out of
our negotiations. I have learned a lot about the way both Republicans and
Democrats view the debate before us. I have learned a lot about the good
ideas that we could all embrace.

We ought to resolve our remaining differences. I am willing to work to
resolve them. I am ready to meet tomorrow. But I ask you to consider that
we should at least enact these savings that both plans have in common and
give the American people their balanced budget, a tax cut, lower interest
rates, and a brighter future. We should do that now, and make permanent
deficits yesterday's legacy.

Now it is time for us to look also to the challenges of today and tomorrow,
beyond the burdens of yesterday. The challenges are significant. But
America was built on challenges, not promises. And when we work together to
meet them, we never fail. That is the key to a more perfect Union. Our
individual dreams must be realized by our common efforts.

Tonight I want to speak to you about the challenges we all face as a
people.

Strengthening Families

Our first challenge is to cherish our children and strengthen America's
families. Family is the foundation of American life. If we have stronger
families, we will have a stronger America.

Before I go on, I would like to take just a moment to thank my own family,
and to thank the person who has taught me more than anyone else over 25
years about the importance of families and children--a wonderful wife, a
magnificent mother and a great First Lady. Thank you, Hillary.

All strong families begin with taking more responsibility for our children.
I have heard Mrs. Gore say that it's hard to be a parent today, but it's
even harder to be a child. So all of us, not just as parents, but all of us
in our other roles--our media, our schools, our teachers, our communities,
our churches and synagogues, our businesses, our governments--all of us
have a responsibility to help our children to make it and to make the most
of their lives and their God-given capacities.

To the media, I say you should create movies and CDs and television shows
you'd want your own children and grandchildren to enjoy.

I call on Congress to pass the requirement for a V-chip in TV sets so that
parents can screen out programs they believe are inappropriate for their
children. When parents control what their young children see, that is not
censorship; that is enabling parents to assume more personal responsibility
for their children's upbringing. And I urge them to do it. The V-chip
requirement is part of the important telecommunications bill now pending in
this Congress. It has bipartisan support, and I urge you to pass it now.

To make the V-chip work, I challenge the broadcast industry to do what
movies have done--to identify your programming in ways that help parents
to protect their children. And I invite the leaders of major media
corporations in the entertainment industry to come to the White House next
month to work with us in a positive way on concrete ways to improve what
our children see on television. I am ready to work with you.

I say to those who make and market cigarettes: every year a million
children take up smoking, even though it is against the law. Three hundred
thousand of them will have their lives shortened as a result. Our
administration has taken steps to stop the massive marketing campaigns that
appeal to our children. We are simply saying: Market your products to
adults, if you wish, but draw the line on children.

I say to those who are on welfare, and especially to those who have been
trapped on welfare for a long time: For too long our welfare system has
undermined the values of family and work, instead of supporting them. The
Congress and I are near agreement on sweeping welfare reform. We agree on
time limits, tough work requirements, and the toughest possible child
support enforcement. But I believe we must also provide child care so that
mothers who are required to go to work can do so without worrying about
what is happening to their children.

I challenge this Congress to send me a bipartisan welfare reform bill that
will really move people from welfare to work and do the right thing by our
children. I will sign it immediately.

Let us be candid about this difficult problem. Passing a law, even the best
possible law, is only a first step. The next step is to make it work. I
challenge people on welfare to make the most of this opportunity for
independence. I challenge American businesses to give people on welfare the
chance to move into the work force. I applaud the work of religious groups
and others who care for the poor. More than anyone else in our society,
they know the true difficulty of the task before us, and they are in a
position to help. Every one of us should join them. That is the only way we
can make real welfare reform a reality in the lives of the American
people.

To strengthen the family we must do everything we can to keep the teen
pregnancy rate going down. I am gratified, as I'm sure all Americans are,
that it has dropped for two years in a row. But we all know it is still far
too high.

Tonight I am pleased to announce that a group of prominent Americans is
responding to that challenge by forming an organization that will support
grass-roots community efforts all across our country in a national campaign
against teen pregnancy. And I challenge all of us and every American to
join their efforts.

I call on American men and women in families to give greater respect to one
another. We must end the deadly scourge of domestic violence in our
country. And I challenge America's families to work harder to stay
together. For families who stay together not only do better economically,
their children do better as well.

In particular, I challenge the fathers of this country to love and care for
their children. If your family has separated, you must pay your child
support. We're doing more than ever to make sure you do, and we're going to
do more, but let's all admit something about that, too: A check will not
substitute for a parent's love and guidance. And only you--only you can
make the decision to help raise your children. No matter who you are, how
low or high your station in life, it is the most basic human duty of every
American to do that job to the best of his or her ability.

Education

Our second challenge is to provide Americans with the educational
opportunities we will all need for this new century. In our schools, every
classroom in America must be connected to the information superhighway,
with computers and good software, and well-trained teachers. We are working
with the telecommunications industry, educators and parents to connect 20
percent of California's classrooms by this spring, and every classroom and
every library in the entire United States by the year 2000. I ask Congress
to support this education technology initiative so that we can make sure
this national partnership succeeds.

Every diploma ought to mean something. I challenge every community, every
school and every state to adopt national standards of excellence; to
measure whether schools are meeting those standards; to cut bureaucratic
red tape so that schools and teachers have more flexibility for grass-roots
reform; and to hold them accountable for results. That's what our Goals
2000 initiative is all about.

I challenge every state to give all parents the right to choose which
public school their children will attend; and to let teachers form new
schools with a charter they can keep only if they do a good job.

I challenge all our schools to teach character education, to teach good
values and good citizenship. And if it means that teenagers will stop
killing each other over designer jackets, then our public schools should be
able to require their students to wear school uniforms.

I challenge our parents to become their children's first teachers. Turn off
the TV. See that the homework is done. And visit your children's classroom.
No program, no teacher, no one else can do that for you.

My fellow Americans, higher education is more important today than ever
before. We've created a new student loan program that's made it easier to
borrow and repay those loans, and we have dramatically cut the student loan
default rate. That's something we should all be proud of, because it was
unconscionably high just a few years ago. Through AmeriCorps, our national
service program, this year 25,000 young people will earn college money by
serving their local communities to improve the lives of their friends and
neighbors. These initiatives are right for America and we should keep them
going.

And we should also work hard to open the doors of college even wider. I
challenge Congress to expand work-study and help one million young
Americans work their way through college by the year 2000; to provide a
$1000 merit scholarship for the top five percent of graduates in every high
school in the United States; to expand Pell Grant scholarships for
deserving and needy students; and to make up to $10,000 a year of college
tuition tax deductible. It's a good idea for America.

Our third challenge is to help every American who is willing to work for
it, achieve economic security in this new age. People who work hard still
need support to get ahead in the new economy. They need education and
training for a lifetime. They need more support for families raising
children. They need retirement security. They need access to health care.
More and more Americans are finding that the education of their childhood
simply doesn't last a lifetime.

G.I. Bill For Workers

So I challenge Congress to consolidate 70 overlapping, antiquated
job-training programs into a simple voucher worth $2,600 for unemployed or
underemployed workers to use as they please for community college tuition
or other training. This is a G.I. Bill for America's workers we should all
be able to agree on.

More and more Americans are working hard without a raise. Congress sets the
minimum wage. Within a year, the minimum wage will fall to a 40-year low in
purchasing power. Four dollars and 25 cents an hour is no longer a living
wage, but millions of Americans and their children are trying to live on
it. I challenge you to raise their minimum wage.

In 1993, Congress cut the taxes of 15 million hard-pressed working families
to make sure that no parents who work full-time would have to raise their
children in poverty, and to encourage people to move from welfare to work.
This expanded earned income tax credit is now worth about $1,800 a year to
a family of four living on $20,000. The budget bill I vetoed would have
reversed this achievement and raised taxes on nearly 8 million of these
people. We should not do that.

I also agree that the people who are helped under this initiative are not
all those in our country who are working hard to do a good job raising
their children and at work. I agree that we need a tax credit for working
families with children. That's one of the things most of us in this
Chamber, I hope, can agree on. I know it is strongly supported by the
Republican majority. And it should be part of any final budget agreement.

I want to challenge every business that can possibly afford it to provide
pensions for your employees. And I challenge Congress to pass a proposal
recommended by the White House Conference on Small Business that would make
it easier for small businesses and farmers to establish their own pension
plans. That is something we should all agree on.

We should also protect existing pension plans. Two years ago, with
bipartisan support that was almost unanimous on both sides of the aisle, we
moved to protect the pensions of 8 million working people and to stabilize
the pensions of 32 million more. Congress should not now let companies
endanger those workers' pension funds. I know the proposal to liberalize
the ability of employers to take money out of pension funds for other
purposes would raise money for the treasury. But I believe it is false
economy. I vetoed that proposal last year, and I would have to do so
again.

Health Care

Finally, if our working families are going to succeed in the new economy,
they must be able to buy health insurance policies that they do not lose
when they change jobs or when someone in their family gets sick. Over the
past two years, over one million Americans in working families have lost
their health insurance. We have to do more to make health care available to
every American. And Congress should start by passing the bipartisan bill
sponsored by Senator Kennedy and Senator Kassebaum that would require
insurance companies to stop dropping people when they switch jobs, and stop
denying coverage for preexisting conditions. Let's all do that.

And even as we enact savings in these programs, we must have a common
commitment to preserve the basic protections of Medicare and Medicaid--not
just to the poor, but to people in working families, including children,
people with disabilities, people with AIDS, and senior citizens in nursing
homes.

In the past three years, we've saved $15 billion just by fighting health
care fraud and abuse. We have all agreed to save much more. We have all
agreed to stabilize the Medicare Trust Fund. But we must not abandon our
fundamental obligations to the people who need Medicare and Medicaid.
America cannot become stronger if they become weaker.

The G.I. Bill for workers, tax relief for education and child rearing,
pension availability and protection, access to health care, preservation of
Medicare and Medicaid--these things, along with the Family and Medical
Leave Act passed in 1993--these things will help responsible, hard-working
American families to make the most of their own lives.

But employers and employees must do their part, as well, as they are doing
in so many of our finest companies--working together, putting the
long-term prosperity ahead of the short-term gain. As workers increase
their hours and their productivity, employers should make sure they get the
skills they need and share the benefits of the good years, as well as the
burdens of the bad ones. When companies and workers work as a team they do
better, and so does America.

Crime

Our fourth great challenge is to take our streets back from crime and gangs
and drugs. At last we have begun to find a way to reduce crime, forming
community partnerships with local police forces to catch criminals and
prevent crime. This strategy, called community policing, is clearly
working. Violent crime is coming down all across America. In New York City
murders are down 25 percent; in St. Louis, 18 percent; in Seattle, 32
percent. But we still have a long way to go before our streets are safe and
our people are free from fear.

The Crime Bill of 1994 is critical to the success of community policing. It
provides funds for 100,000 new police in communities of all sizes. We're
already a third of the way there. And I challenge the Congress to finish
the job. Let us stick with a strategy that's working and keep the crime
rate coming down.

Community policing also requires bonds of trust between citizens and
police. I ask all Americans to respect and support our law enforcement
officers. And to our police, I say, our children need you as role models
and heroes. Don't let them down.

The Brady Bill has already stopped 44,000 people with criminal records from
buying guns. The assault weapons ban is keeping 19 kinds of assault weapons
out of the hands of violent gangs. I challenge the Congress to keep those
laws on the books.

Our next step in the fight against crime is to take on gangs the way we
once took on the mob. I'm directing the FBI and other investigative
agencies to target gangs that involve juveniles in violent crime, and to
seek authority to prosecute as adults teenagers who maim and kill like
adults.

And I challenge local housing authorities and tenant associations: Criminal
gang members and drug dealers are destroying the lives of decent tenants.
From now on, the rule for residents who commit crime and peddle drugs
should be one strike and you're out.

I challenge every state to match federal policy to assure that serious
violent criminals serve at least 85 percent of their sentence.

More police and punishment are important, but they're not enough. We have
got to keep more of our young people out of trouble, with prevention
strategies not dictated by Washington, but developed in communities. I
challenge all of our communities, all of our adults, to give our children
futures to say yes to. And I challenge Congress not to abandon the Crime
Bill's support of these grass-roots prevention efforts.

Finally, to reduce crime and violence we have to reduce the drug problem.
The challenge begins in our homes, with parents talking to their children
openly and firmly. It embraces our churches and synagogues, our youth
groups and our schools.

I challenge Congress not to cut our support for drug-free schools. People
like the D.A.R.E. officers are making a real impression on grade
schoolchildren that will give them the strength to say no when the time
comes.

Meanwhile, we continue our efforts to cut the flow of drugs into America.
For the last two years, one man in particular has been on the front lines
of that effort. Tonight I am nominating him--a hero of the Persian Gulf
War and the Commander in Chief of the United States Military Southern
Command--General Barry McCaffrey, as America's new Drug Czar.

General McCaffrey has earned three Purple Hearts and two Silver Stars
fighting for this country. Tonight I ask that he lead our nation's battle
against drugs at home and abroad. To succeed, he needs a force far larger
than he has ever commanded before. He needs all of us. Every one of us has
a role to play on this team.

Thank you, General McCaffrey, for agreeing to serve your country one more
time.

Environment

Our fifth challenge: to leave our environment safe and clean for the next
generation. Because of a generation of bipartisan effort we do have cleaner
water and air, lead levels in children's blood has been cut by 70 percent,
toxic emissions from factories cut in half. Lake Erie was dead, and now
it's a thriving resource. But 10 million children under 12 still live
within four miles of a toxic waste dump. A third of us breathe air that
endangers our health. And in too many communities, the water is not safe to
drink. We still have much to do.

Yet Congress has voted to cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent. That
means more toxic chemicals in our water, more smog in our air, more
pesticides in our food. Lobbyists for polluters have been allowed to write
their own loopholes into bills to weaken laws that protect the health and
safety of our children. Some say that the taxpayer should pick up the tab
for toxic waste and let polluters who can afford to fix it off the hook. I
challenge Congress to reexamine those policies and to reverse them.

This issue has not been a partisan issue. The most significant
environmental gains in the last 30 years were made under a Democratic
Congress and President Richard Nixon. We can work together. We have to
believe some basic things. Do you believe we can expand the economy without
hurting the environment? I do. Do you believe we can create more jobs over
the long run by cleaning the environment up? I know we can. That should be
our commitment.

We must challenge businesses and communities to take more initiative in
protecting the environment, and we have to make it easier for them to do
it. To businesses this administration is saying: If you can find a cheaper,
more efficient way than government regulations require to meet tough
pollution standards, do it--as long as you do it right. To communities we
say: We must strengthen community right-to-know laws requiring polluters to
disclose their emissions, but you have to use the information to work with
business to cut pollution. People do have a right to know that their air
and their water are safe.

Foreign Policy

Our sixth challenge is to maintain America's leadership in the fight for
freedom and peace throughout the world. Because of American leadership,
more people than ever before live free and at peace. And Americans have
known 50 years of prosperity and security.

We owe thanks especially to our veterans of World War II. I would like to
say to Senator Bob Dole and to all others in this Chamber who fought in
World War II, and to all others on both sides of the aisle who have fought
bravely in all our conflicts since: I salute your service, and so do the
American people.

All over the world, even after the Cold War, people still look to us and
trust us to help them seek the blessings of peace and freedom. But as the
Cold War fades into memory, voices of isolation say America should retreat
from its responsibilities. I say they are wrong.

The threats we face today as Americans respect no nation's borders. Think
of them: terrorism, the spread of weapons of mass destruction, organized
crime, drug trafficking, ethnic and religious hatred, aggression by rogue
states, environmental degradation. If we fail to address these threats
today, we will suffer the consequences in all our tomorrows.

Of course, we can't be everywhere. Of course, we can't do everything. But
where our interests and our values are at stake, and where we can make a
difference, America must lead. We must not be isolationist.

We must not be the world's policeman. But we can and should be the world's
very best peacemaker. By keeping our military strong, by using diplomacy
where we can and force where we must, by working with others to share the
risk and the cost of our efforts, America is making a difference for people
here and around the world. For the first time since the dawn of the nuclear
age, there is not a single Russian missile pointed at America's children.

North Korea

North Korea has now frozen its dangerous nuclear weapons program. In Haiti,
the dictators are gone, democracy has a new day, the flow of desperate
refugees to our shores has subsided. Through tougher trade deals for
America--over 80 of them--we have opened markets abroad, and now exports
are at an all-time high, growing faster than imports and creating good
American jobs.

Northern Ireland

We stood with those taking risks for peace: In Northern Ireland, where
Catholic and Protestant children now tell their parents, violence must
never return. In the Middle East, where Arabs and Jews who once seemed
destined to fight forever now share knowledge and resources, and even
dreams.

Bosnia

And we stood up for peace in Bosnia. Remember the skeletal prisoners, the
mass graves, the campaign to rape and torture, the endless lines of
refugees, the threat of a spreading war. All these threats, all these
horrors have now begun to give way to the promise of peace. Now, our troops
and a strong NATO, together with our new partners from Central Europe and
elsewhere, are helping that peace to take hold.

As all of you know, I was just there with a bipartisan congressional group,
and I was so proud not only of what our troops were doing, but of the pride
they evidenced in what they were doing. They knew what America's mission in
this world is, and they were proud to be carrying it out.

Through these efforts, we have enhanced the security of the American
people. But make no mistake about it: important challenges remain.

Russia

The START II Treaty with Russia will cut our nuclear stockpiles by another
25 percent. I urge the Senate to ratify it--now. We must end the race to
create new nuclear weapons by signing a truly comprehensive nuclear test
ban treaty--this year.

As we remember what happened in the Japanese subway, we can outlaw poison
gas forever if the Senate ratifies the Chemical Weapons Convention--this
year. We can intensify the fight against terrorists and organized criminals
at home and abroad if Congress passes the anti-terrorism legislation I
proposed after the Oklahoma City bombing--now. We can help more people
move from hatred to hope all across the world in our own interest if
Congress gives us the means to remain the world's leader for peace.

My fellow Americans, the six challenges I have just discussed are for all
of us. Our seventh challenge is really America's challenge to those of us
in this hallowed hall tonight: to reinvent our government and make our
democracy work for them.

Reform

Last year this Congress applied to itself the laws it applies to everyone
else. This Congress banned gifts and meals from lobbyists. This Congress
forced lobbyists to disclose who pays them and what legislation they are
trying to pass or kill. This Congress did that, and I applaud you for it.

Now I challenge Congress to go further--to curb special interest influence
in politics by passing the first truly bipartisan campaign reform bill in a
generation. You, Republicans and Democrats alike, can show the American
people that we can limit spending and open the airwaves to all candidates.

I also appeal to Congress to pass the line-item veto you promised the
American people.

Our administration is working hard to give the American people a government
that works better and costs less. Thanks to the work of Vice President
Gore, we are eliminating 16,000 pages of unnecessary rules and regulations,
shifting more decision-making out of Washington, back to states and local
communities.

As we move into the era of balanced budgets and smaller government, we must
work in new ways to enable people to make the most of their own lives. We
are helping America's communities, not with more bureaucracy, but with more
opportunities. Through our successful Empowerment Zones and Community
Development Banks, we are helping people to find jobs, to start businesses.
And with tax incentives for companies that clean up abandoned industrial
property, we can bring jobs back to places that desperately, desperately
need them.

But there are some areas that the federal government should not leave and
should address and address strongly. One of these areas is the problem of
illegal immigration. After years of neglect, this administration has taken
a strong stand to stiffen the protection of our borders. We are increasing
border controls by 50 percent. We are increasing inspections to prevent the
hiring of illegal immigrants. And tonight, I announce I will sign an
executive order to deny federal contracts to businesses that hire illegal
immigrants.

Let me be very clear about this: We are still a nation of immigrants; we
should be proud of it. We should honor every legal immigrant here, working
hard to become a new citizen. But we are also a nation of laws.

I want to say a special word now to those who work for our federal
government. Today our federal government is 200,000 employees smaller than
it was the day I took office as President.

Our federal government today is the smallest it has been in 30 years, and
it's getting smaller every day. Most of our fellow Americans probably don't
know that. And there is a good reason: The remaining federal work force is
composed of Americans who are now working harder and working smarter than
ever before, to make sure the quality of our services does not decline.

I'd like to give you one example. His name is Richard Dean. He is a 49
year-old Vietnam veteran who's worked for the Social Security
Administration for 22 years now. Last year he was hard at work in the
Federal Building in Oklahoma City when the blast killed 169 people and
brought the rubble down all around him. He reentered that building four
times. He saved the lives of three women. He's here with us this evening,
and I want to recognize Richard and applaud both his public service and his
extraordinary personal heroism.

But Richard Dean's story doesn't end there. This last November, he was
forced out of his office when the government shut down. And the second time
the government shut down he continued helping Social Security recipients,
but he was working without pay.

On behalf of Richard Dean and his family, and all the other people who are
out there working every day doing a good job for the American people, I
challenge all of you in this Chamber: Never, ever shut the federal
government down again.

On behalf of all Americans, especially those who need their Social Security
payments at the beginning of March, I also challenge the Congress to
preserve the full faith and credit of the United States--to honor the
obligations of this great nation as we have for 220 years; to rise above
partisanship and pass a straightforward extension of the debt limit and
show people America keeps its word.

I know that this evening I have asked a lot of Congress, and even more from
America. But I am confident: When Americans work together in their homes,
their schools, their churches, their synagogues, their civic groups, their
workplace, they can meet any challenge.

I say again, the era of big government is over. But we can't go back to the
era of fending for yourself. We have to go forward to the era of working
together as a community, as a team, as one America, with all of us reaching
across these lines that divide us--the division, the discrimination, the
rancor--we have to reach across it to find common ground. We have got to
work together if we want America to work.

I want you to meet two more people tonight who do just that. Lucius Wright
is a teacher in the Jackson, Mississippi, public school system. A Vietnam
veteran, he has created groups to help inner-city children turn away from
gangs and build futures they can believe in. Sergeant Jennifer Rodgers is a
police officer in Oklahoma City. Like Richard Dean, she helped to pull her
fellow citizens out of the rubble and deal with that awful tragedy. She
reminds us that in their response to that atrocity the people of Oklahoma
City lifted all of us with their basic sense of decency and community.

Lucius Wright and Jennifer Rodgers are special Americans. And I have the
honor to announce tonight that they are the very first of several thousand
Americans who will be chosen to carry the Olympic torch on its long journey
from Los Angeles to the centennial of the modern Olympics in Atlanta this
summer--not because they are star athletes, but because they are star
citizens, community heroes meeting America's challenges. They are our real
champions.

Now, each of us must hold high the torch of citizenship in our own lives.
None of us can finish the race alone. We can only achieve our destiny
together--one hand, one generation, one American connecting to another.

There have always been things we could do together--dreams we could make
real--which we could never have done on our own. We Americans have forged
our identity, our very union, from every point of view and every point on
the planet, every different opinion. But we must be bound together by a
faith more powerful than any doctrine that divides us--by our belief in
progress, our love of liberty, and our relentless search for common
ground.

America has always sought and always risen to every challenge. Who would
say that, having come so far together, we will not go forward from here?
Who would say that this age of possibility is not for all Americans?

Our country is and always has been a great and good nation. But the best is
yet to come, if we all do our part.

Thank you, God bless you and God bless the United States of America. Thank
you.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of the 105th Congress,
distinguished guests, my fellow Americans:

I think I should start by saying thanks for inviting me back.

I come before you tonight with a challenge as great as any in our peacetime
history--and a plan of action to meet that challenge, to prepare our
people for the bold new world of the 21st century.

We have much to be thankful for. With four years of growth, we have won
back the basic strength of our economy. With crime and welfare rolls
declining, we are winning back our optimism, the enduring faith that we can
master any difficulty. With the Cold War receding and global commerce at
record levels, we are helping to win an unrivaled peace and prosperity all
across the world.

My fellow Americans, the state of our union is strong, but now we must rise
to the decisive moment, to make a nation and a world better than any we
have ever known.

The new promise of the global economy, the Information Age, unimagined new
work, life-enhancing technology--all these are ours to seize. That is our
honor and our challenge. We must be shapers of events, not observers, for
if we do not act, the moment will pass and we will lose the best
possibilities of our future.

We face no imminent threat, but we do have an enemy. The enemy of our time
is inaction.

So tonight I issue a call to action--action by this Congress, action by
our states, by our people to prepare America for the 21st century; action
to keep our economy and our democracy strong and working for all our
people; action to strengthen education and harness the forces of technology
and science; action to build stronger families and stronger communities and
a safer environment; action to keep America the world's strongest force for
peace, freedom and prosperity; and above all, action to build a more
perfect union here at home.

The spirit we bring to our work will make all the difference.

We must be committed to the pursuit of opportunity for all Americans,
responsibility from all Americans in a community of all Americans. And we
must be committed to a new kind of government: not to solve all our
problems for us, but to give our people--all our people--the tools they
need to make the most of their own lives. And we must work together.

The people of this nation elected us all. They want us to be partners, not
partisans. They put us all right here in the same boat. They gave us all
oars, and they told us to row. Now, here is the direction I believe we
should take.

First, we must move quickly to complete the unfinished business of our
country: to balance the budget, renew our democracy, and finish the job of
welfare reform.

Over the last four years we have brought new economic growth by investing
in our people, expanding our exports, cutting our deficits, creating over
11 million new jobs, a four-year record.

Now we must keep our economy the strongest in the world. We here tonight
have an historic opportunity. Let this Congress be the Congress that
finally balances the budget. Thank you.

In two days I will propose a detailed plan to balance the budget by 2002.
This plan will balance the budget and invest in our people while protecting
Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. It will balance the
budget and build on the vice president's efforts to make our government
work better--even as it costs less.

It will balance the budget and provide middle-class tax relief to pay for
education and health care, to help to raise a child, to buy and sell a
home.

Balancing the budget requires only your vote and my signature. It does not
require us to rewrite our Constitution. I believe, I believe it is both
unnecessary, unwise to adopt a balanced budget amendment that could cripple
our country in time of economic crisis and force unwanted results such as
judges halting Social Security checks or increasing taxes.

Let us at least agree we should not pass any measure, no measure should be
passed that threatens Social Security. We don't need, whatever your view on
that, we all must concede we don't need a constitutional amendment, we need
action. Whatever our differences, we should balance the budget now, and
then, for the long-term health of our society, we must agree to a
bipartisan process to preserve Social Security and reform Medicare for the
long run, so that these fundamental programs will be as strong for our
children as they are for our parents.

And let me say something that's not in my script tonight. I know this is
not going to be easy. But I really believe one of the reasons the American
people gave me a second term was to take the tough decisions in the next
four years that will carry our country through the next 50 years. I know it
is easier for me than for you to say or do. But another reason I was
elected is to support all of you, without regard to party, to give you what
is necessary to join in these decisions. We owe it to our country and to
our future.

Our second piece of unfinished business requires us to commit ourselves
tonight, before the eyes of America, to finally enacting bipartisan
campaign finance reform.

Now, Senators McCain and Feingold, Representatives Shays and Meehan have
reached across party lines here to craft tough and fair reform. Their
proposal would curb spending, reduce the role of special interests, create
a level playing field between challengers and incumbents, and ban
contributions from non-citizens, all corporate sources, and the other large
soft-money contributions that both parties receive.

You know and I know that this can be delayed, and you know and I know that
delay will mean the death of reform.

So let's set our own deadline. Let's work together to write bipartisan
campaign finance reform into law and pass McCain-Feingold by the day we
celebrate the birth of our democracy, July the 4th.

There is a third piece of unfinished business. Over the last four years we
moved a record two and a quarter million people off the welfare roles. Then
last year Congress enacted landmark welfare reform legislation demanding
that all able-bodied recipients assume the responsibility of moving from
welfare to work. Now each and every one of us has to fulfill our
responsibility, indeed our moral obligation, to make sure that people who
now must work can work. And now we must act to meet a new goal: two million
more people off the welfare rolls by the year 2000.

Here is my plan: Tax credits and other incentives for businesses that hire
people off welfare; Incentives for job placement firms in states to create
more jobs for welfare recipients; Training, transportation and child care
to help people go to work. Now I challenge every state--turn those welfare
checks into private sector paychecks. I challenge every religious
congregation, every community nonprofit, every business to hire someone off
welfare. And I'd like to say especially to every employer in our country
who ever criticized the old welfare system, you can't blame that old system
anymore; we have torn it down. Now, do your part. Give someone on welfare
the chance to go to work.

Tonight I am pleased to announce that five major corporations--Sprint,
Monsanto, UPS, Burger King and United Airlines--will be the first to join
in a new national effort to marshal America's businesses large and small to
create jobs so that people can move from welfare to work.

We passed welfare reform. All of you know I believe we were right to do it.
But no one can walk out of this chamber with a clear conscience unless you
are prepared to finish the job.

And we must join together to do something else, too, something both
Republican and Democratic governors have asked us to do: to restore basic
health and disability benefits when misfortune strikes immigrants who came
to this country legally, who work hard, pay taxes, and obey the law. To do
otherwise is simply unworthy of a great nation of immigrants.

Now, looking ahead, the greatest step of all, the high threshold to the
future we must now cross, and my number one priority for the next four
years, is to ensure that all Americans have the best education in the
world. Thank you.

Let's work together to meet these three goals: every eight-year-old must be
able to read, every 12-year-old must be able to log on to the Internet,
every 18-year-old must be able to go to college, and every adult American
must be able to keep on learning for a lifetime.

My balanced budget makes an unprecedented commitment to these goals--$51
billion next year--but far more than money is required. I have a plan, a
call to action for American education based on these 10 principles:

First, a national crusade for education standards--not federal government
standards, but national standards, representing what all our students must
know to succeed in the knowledge economy of the 21st century. Every state
and school must shape the curriculum to reflect these standards and train
teachers to lift students up to them. To help schools meet the standards
and measure their progress, we will lead an effort over the next two years
to develop national tests of student achievement in reading and math.

Tonight I issue a challenge to the nation. Every state should adopt high
national standards, and by 1999, every state should test every 4th grader
in reading and every 8th grader in math to make sure these standards are
met.

Raising standards will not be easy, and some of our children will not be
able to meet them at first. The point is not to put our children down, but
to lift them up. Good tests will show us who needs help, what changes in
teaching to make, and which schools need to improve. They can help us end
social promotion, for no child should move from grade school to junior high
or junior high to high school until he or she is ready.

Last month our secretary of education, Dick Riley, and I visited northern
Illinois, where 8th grade students from 20 school districts, in a project
aptly called First in the World, took the third International Math and
Science Study.

That's a test that reflects the world-class standards our children must
meet for the new era. And those students in Illinois tied for first in the
world in science and came in second in math. Two of them, Kristen Tanner
and Chris Getsla, are here tonight along with their teacher, Sue Winski.
They're up there with the first lady, and they prove that when we aim high
and challenge our students, they will be the best in the world. Let's give
them a hand. Stand up, please.

Second, to have the best schools, we must have the best teachers. Most of
us in this chamber would not be here tonight without the help of those
teachers. I know that I wouldn't be here.

For years many of our educators, led by North Carolina's governor, Jim
Hunt, and the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, have
worked very hard to establish nationally accepted credentials for
excellence in teaching.

Just 500 of these teachers have been certified since 1995. My budget will
enable 100,000 more to seek national certification as master teachers. We
should reward and recognize our best teachers. And as we reward them, we
should quickly and fairly remove those few who don't measure up, and we
should challenge more of our finest young people to consider teaching as a
career.

Third, we must do more to help all our children read. Forty percent--40
percent--of our 8-year-olds cannot read on their own. That's why we have
just launched the America Reads initiative, to build a citizen army of one
million volunteer tutors to make sure every child can read independently by
the end of the 3rd grade. We will use thousands of AmeriCorps volunteers to
mobilize this citizen army. We want at least 100,000 college students to
help.

And tonight I'm pleased that 60 college presidents have answered my call,
pledging that thousands of their work-study students will serve for one
year as reading tutors.

This is also a challenge to every teacher and every principal.

You must use these tutors to help your students read. And it is especially
a challenge to our parents. You must read with your children every night.

This leads to the fourth principle: Learning begins in the first days of
life. Scientists are now discovering how young children develop emotionally
and intellectually from their very first days and how important it is for
parents to begin immediately talking, singing, even reading to their
infants. The first lady has spent years writing about this issue, studying
it. And she and I are going to convene a White House conference on early
learning and the brain this spring to explore how parents and educators can
best use these startling new findings.

We already know we should start teaching children before they start school.
That's why this balanced budget expands Head Start to one million children
by 2002. And that is why the vice president and Mrs. Gore will host their
annual family conference this June on what we can do to make sure that
parents are an active part of their children's learning all the way through
school.

They've done a great deal to highlight the importance of family in our
life, and now they're turning their attention to getting more parents
involved in their children's learning all the way through school. I thank
you, Mr. Vice President, and I thank you especially, Tipper, for what
you're doing.

Fifth, every state should give parents the power to choose the right public
school for their children. Their right to choose will foster competition
and innovation that can make public schools better. We should also make it
possible for more parents and teachers to start charter schools, schools
that set and meet the highest standards and exist only as long as they do.

Our plan will help America to create 3,000 of these charter schools by the
next century, nearly seven times as there are in the country today, so that
parents will have even more choices in sending their children to the best
schools.

Sixth, character education must be taught in our schools. We must teach our
children to be good citizens. And we must continue to promote order and
discipline; supporting communities that introduce school uniforms, impose
curfews, enforce truancy laws, remove disruptive students from the
classroom, and have zero tolerance for guns and drugs in schools.

Seventh, we cannot expect our children to raise themselves up in schools
that are literally falling down. With the student population at an all-time
high, and record numbers of school buildings falling into disrepair, this
has now become a serious national concern. Therefore, my budget includes a
new initiative: $5 billion to help communities finance $20 billion in
school construction over the next four years.

Eighth, we must make the 13th and 14th years of education--at least two
years of college--just as universal in America by the 21st century as a
high school education is today, and we must open the doors of college to
all Americans.

To do that, I propose America's Hope Scholarship, based on Georgia's
pioneering program--two years of a $1,500 tax credit for college tuition,
enough to pay for the typical community college. I also propose a tax
deduction of up to $10,000 a year for all tuition after high school, an
expanded IRA you can withdraw from tax free for education, and the largest
increase in Pell Grant scholarship in 20 years.

Now this plan will give most families the ability to pay no taxes on money
they save for college tuition. I ask you to pass it and give every American
who works hard the chance to go to college.

Ninth, in the 21st century we must expand the frontiers of learning across
a lifetime. All our people, of whatever age, must have the chance to learn
new skills.

Most Americans live near a community college. The roads that take them
there can be paths to a better future. My GI bill for America's workers
will transform the confusing tangle of federal training programs into a
simple skill grant to go directly into eligible workers' hands.

For too long this bill has been sitting on that desk there, without action.
I ask you to pass it now. Let's give more of our workers the ability to
learn and to earn for a lifetime.

Tenth, we must bring the power of the Information Age into all our
schools.

Last year I challenged America to connect every classroom and library to
the Internet by the year 2000, so that for the first time in our history,
children in the most isolated rural town, the most comfortable suburbs, the
poorest inner-city schools will have the same access to the same universe
of knowledge.

That is my plan--a call to action for American education. Some may say
that it is unusual for a president to pay this kind of attention to
education. Some may say it is simply because the president and his
wonderful wife have been obsessed with this subject for more years than
they can recall. That is not what is driving these proposals. We must
understand the significance of this endeavor.

One of the greatest sources of our strength throughout the Cold War was a
bipartisan foreign policy. Because our future was at stake, politics
stopped at the water's edge. Now I ask you, and I ask all our nation's
governors, I ask parents, teachers and citizens all across America, for a
new nonpartisan commitment to education, because education is a critical
national security issue for our future and politics must stop at the
schoolhouse door.

To prepare America for the 21st century, we must harness the powerful
forces of science and technology to benefit all Americans. This is the
first State of the Union carried live in video over the Internet, but we've
only begun to spread the benefits of a technology revolution that should
become the modern birthright of every citizen.

Our effort to connect every classroom is just the beginning. Now we should
connect every hospital to the Internet so that doctors can instantly share
data about their patients with the best specialists in the field.

And I challenge the private sector tonight to start by connecting every
children's hospital as soon as possible so that a child in bed can stay in
touch with school, family and friends. A sick child need no longer be a
child alone.

We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading
universities and national laboratories can communicate in speeds a thousand
times faster than today to develop new medical treatments, new sources of
energy, new ways of working together. But we cannot stop there.

As the Internet becomes our new town square, a computer in every home: a
teacher of all subjects, a connection to all cultures. This will no longer
be a dream, but a necessity. And over the next decade, that must be our
goal.

We must continue to explore the heavens, pressing on with the Mars probes
and the International Space Station, both of which will have practical
applications for our everyday living.

We must speed the remarkable advances in medical science. The human genome
project is now decoding the genetic mysteries of life. American scientists
have discovered genes linked to breast cancer and ovarian cancer and
medication that stops a stroke in progress and begins to reverse its
effects, and treatments that dramatically lengthen the lives of people with
HIV and AIDS.

Since I took office, funding for AIDS research at the National Institutes
of Health has increased dramatically to $1.5 billion. With new resources,
NIH will now become the most powerful discovery engine for an AIDS vaccine,
working with other scientists, to finally end the threat of AIDS. Thank
you. Remember that every year, every year we move up the discovery of an
AIDS vaccine we'll save millions of lives around the world. We must
reinforce our commitment to medical science.

To prepare America for the 21st century we must build stronger families.
Over the past four years the Family and Medical Leave Law has helped
millions of Americans to take time off to be with their families.

With new pressures on people and the way they work and live, I believe we
must expand family leave so that workers can take time off for teacher
conferences and a child's medical checkup. We should pass flex time so
workers can choose to be paid for overtime in income or trade it in for
time off to be with their families.

We must continue--we must continue, step by step, to give more families
access to affordable quality health care. Forty million Americans still
lack health insurance. Ten million children still lack health insurance.
Eighty percent of them have working parents who pay taxes. That is wrong.

My--my balanced budget will extend health coverage to up to 5 million of
those children. Since nearly half of all children who lose their insurance
do so because their parents lose or change a job, my budget will also
ensure that people who temporarily lose their jobs can still afford to keep
their health insurance. No child should be without a doctor just because a
parent is without a job.

My Medicare plan modernizes Medicare, increases the life of the trust fund
to 10 years, provides support for respite care for the many families with
loved ones afflicted with Alzheimer's, and, for the first time, it would
fully pay for annual mammograms.

Just as we ended drive-through deliveries of babies last year, we must now
end the dangerous and demeaning practice of forcing women home from the
hospital only hours after a mastectomy.

I ask your support for bipartisan legislation to guarantee that a woman can
stay in the hospital for 48 hours after a mastectomy. With us tonight is
Dr. Kristen Zarfos, a Connecticut surgeon whose outrage at this practice
spurred a national movement and inspired this legislation. I'd like her to
stand so we can thank her for her efforts. Dr. Zarfos, thank you.

In the last four years, we have increased child support collections by 50
percent. Now we should go further and do better by making it a felony for
any parent to cross a state line in an attempt to flee from this, his or
her most sacred obligation.

Finally, we must also protect our children by standing firm in our
determination to ban the advertising and marketing of cigarettes that
endanger their lives.

To prepare America for the 21st century, we must build stronger
communities. We should start with safe streets. Serious crime has dropped
five years in a row. The key has been community policing. We must finish
the job of putting 100,000 community police on the streets of the United
States.

We should pass the Victims' Rights Amendment to the Constitution, and I ask
you to mount a full-scale assault on juvenile crime, with legislation that
declares war on gangs with new prosecutors and tougher penalties, extends
the Brady bill so violent teen criminals will not be able to buy handguns,
requires child safety locks on handguns to prevent unauthorized use, and
helps to keep our schools open after hours, on weekends and in the summer
so our young people will have someplace to go and something to say yes to.

This balanced budget includes the largest anti-drug effort ever--to stop
drugs at their source; punish those who push them; and teach our young
people that drugs are wrong, drugs are illegal, and drugs will kill them. I
hope you will support it.

Our growing economy has helped to revive poor urban and rural
neighborhoods, but we must do more to empower them to create the conditions
in which all families can flourish and to create jobs through investment by
business and loans by banks.

We should double the number of empowerment zones. They've already brought
so much hope to communities like Detroit, where the unemployment rate has
been cut in half in four years. We should restore contaminated urban land
and buildings to constructive use. We should expand the network of
community development banks.

And together, we must pledge tonight that we will use this empowerment
approach, including private sector tax incentives, to renew our capital
city so that Washington is a great place to work and live--and once again
the proud face America shows the world!

We must protect our environment in every community. In the last four years,
we cleaned up 250 toxic waste sites, as many as in the previous 12. Now we
should clean up 500 more so that our children grow up next to parks, not
poison. I urge to pass my proposal to make big polluters live by a simple
rule: If you pollute our environment, you should pay to clean it up.

In the last four years, we strengthened our nation's safe food and clean
drinking water laws; we protected some of America's rarest, most beautiful
land in Utah's Red Rocks region; created three new national parks in the
California desert; and began to restore the Florida Everglades.

Now we must be as vigilant with our rivers as we are with our lands.
Tonight I announce that this year I will designate 10 American Heritage
Rivers to help communities alongside them revitalize their waterfronts and
clean up pollution in the rivers, proving once again that we can grow the
economy as we protect the environment.

We must also protect our global environment, working to ban the worst toxic
chemicals and to reduce the greenhouse gases that challenge our health even
as they change our climate.

Now, we all know that in all of our communities some of our children simply
don't have what they need to grow and learn in their own homes or schools
or neighborhoods. And that means the rest of us must do more, for they are
our children, too. That's why President Bush, General Colin Powell, former
Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros will join the vice president and me to
lead the President's Summit of Service in Philadelphia in April.

Our national service program, AmeriCorps, has already helped 70,000 young
people to work their way through college as they serve America. Now we
intend to mobilize millions of Americans to serve in thousands of ways.
Citizen service is an American responsibility which all Americans should
embrace. And I ask your support for that endeavor.

I'd like to make just one last point about our national community. Our
economy is measured in numbers and statistics. And it's very important. But
the enduring worth of our nation lies in our shared values and our soaring
spirit. So instead of cutting back on our modest efforts to support the
arts and humanities I believe we should stand by them and challenge our
artists, musicians, and writers, challenge our museums, libraries, and
theaters.

We should challenge all Americans in the arts and humanities to join with
their fellow citizens to make the year 2000 a national celebration of the
American spirit in every community, a celebration of our common culture in
the century that is past and in the new one to come in a new millennium so
that we can remain the world's beacon not only of liberty but of creativity
long after the fireworks have faded.

To prepare America for the 21st century we must master the forces of change
in the world and keep American leadership strong and sure for an uncharted
time.

Fifty years ago, a farsighted America led in creating the institutions that
secured victory in the Cold War and built a growing world economy. As a
result, today more people than ever embrace our ideals and share our
interests. Already we have dismantled many of the blocks and barriers that
divided our parents' world. For the first time, more people live under
democracy than dictatorship including every nation in our own hemisphere
but one, and its day, too, will come.

Now we stand at another moment of change and choice, and another time to be
farsighted, to bring America 50 more years of security and prosperity.

In this endeavor, our first task is to help to build for the very first
time an undivided, democratic Europe. When Europe is stable, prosperous,
and at peace, America is more secure.

To that end, we must expand NATO by 1999, so that countries that were once
our adversaries can become our allies. At the special NATO summit this
summer, that is what we will begin to do. We must strengthen NATO's
Partnership for Peace with non-member allies. And we must build a stable
partnership between NATO and a democratic Russia.

An expanded NATO is good for America, and a Europe in which all democracies
define their future not in terms of what they can do to each other, but in
terms of what they can do together for the good of all--that kind of
Europe is good for America.

Second, America must look to the East no less than to the West.

Our security demands it. Americans fought three wars in Asia in this
century.

Our prosperity requires it. More than 2 million American jobs depend upon
trade with Asia. There, too, we are helping to shape an Asia Pacific
community of cooperation, not conflict.

Let our--let our progress there not mask the peril that remains. Together
with South Korea, we must advance peace talks with North Korea and bridge
the Cold War's last divide. And I call on Congress to fund our share of the
agreement under which North Korea must continue to freeze and then
dismantle its nuclear weapons program.

We must pursue a deeper dialogue with China for the sake of our interests
and our ideals. An isolated China is not good for America. A China playing
its proper role in the world is. I will go to China, and I have invited
China's president to come here, not because we agree on everything, but
because engaging China is the best way to work on our common challenges,
like ending nuclear testing, and to deal frankly with our fundamental
differences, like human rights.

The American people must prosper in the global economy. We've worked hard
to tear down trade barriers abroad so that we can create good jobs at home.
I'm proud to say that today America is once again the most competitive
nation and the No. 1 exporter in the world.

Now we must act to expand our exports, especially to Asia and Latin
America, two of the fastest-growing regions on earth, or be left behind as
these emerging economies forge new ties with other nations. That is why we
need the authority now to conclude new trade agreements that open markets
to our goods and services even as we preserve our values.

We need not shrink from the challenge of the global economy. After all, we
have the best workers and the best products. In a truly open market, we can
out-compete anyone, anywhere on earth.

But this is about more than economics. By expanding trade, we can advance
the cause of freedom and democracy around the world. There is no better
example of this truth than Latin America where democracy and open markets
are on the march together. That is why I will visit there in the spring to
reinforce our important ties.

We should all be proud that America led the effort to rescue our neighbor,
Mexico, from its economic crisis. And we should all be proud that last
month Mexico repaid the United States, three full years ahead of schedule,
with half a billion dollar profit to us.

America must continue to be an unrelenting force for peace. From the Middle
East to Haiti, from Northern Ireland to Africa, taking reasonable risks for
peace keeps us from being drawn into far more costly conflicts later. With
American leadership, the killing has stopped in Bosnia. Now the habits of
peace must take hold.

The new NATO force will allow reconstruction and reconciliation to
accelerate. Tonight I ask Congress to continue its strong support of our
troops. They are doing a remarkable job there for America, and America must
do right by them.

Fifth, we must move strongly against new threats to our security. In the
past four years, we agreed to ban--we led the way to a worldwide agreement
to ban nuclear testing.

With Russia, we dramatically cut nuclear arsenals and we stopped targeting
each other's citizens. We are acting to prevent nuclear materials from
falling into the wrong hands, and to rid the world of land mines.

We are working with other nations with renewed intensity to fight drug
traffickers and to stop terrorists before they act and hold them fully
accountable if they do.

Now we must rise to a new test of leadership--ratifying the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Make no mistake about it, it will make our troops safer
from chemical attack. It will help us to fight terrorism. We have no more
important obligations, especially in the wake of what we now know about the
Gulf War.

This treaty has been bipartisan from the beginning, supported by Republican
and Democratic administrations, and Republican and Democratic members of
Congress, and already approved by 68 nations. But if we do not act by April
the 29th, when this convention goes into force--with or without us--we
will lose the chance to have Americans leading and enforcing this effort.
Together we must make the Chemical Weapons Convention law so that at last
we can begin to outlaw poisoned gas from the earth.

Finally, we must have the tools to meet all these challenges. We must
maintain a strong and ready military. We must increase funding for weapons
modernization by the year 2000. And we must take good care of our men and
women in uniform. They are the world's finest.

We must also renew our commitment to America's diplomacy and pay our debts
and dues to international financial institutions like the World Bank--and
to a reforming United Nations. Every dollar--every dollar we devote to
preventing conflicts, to promoting democracy, to stopping the spread of
disease and starvation brings a sure return in security and savings. Yet
international affairs spending today is just 1 percent of the federal
budget, a small fraction of what America invested in diplomacy to choose
leadership over escapism at the start of the cold war.

If America is to continue to lead the world, we here who lead America
simply must find the will to pay our way. A farsighted America moved the
world to a better place over these last 50 years. And so it can be for
another 50 years. But a shortsighted America will soon find its words
falling on deaf ears all around the world.

Almost exactly 50 years ago in the first winter of the Cold War President
Truman stood before a Republican Congress and called upon our country to
meet its responsibilities of leadership. This was his warning. He said, "If
we falter, we may endanger the peace of the world, and we shall surely
endanger the welfare of this nation."

That Congress, led by Republicans like Senator Arthur Vandenburg, answered
President Truman's call. Together, they made the commitments that
strengthened our country for 50 years. Now let us do the same. Let us do
what it takes to remain the indispensable nation, to keep America strong,
secure and prosperous for another 50 years.

In the end, more than anything else, our world leadership grows out of the
power of our example here at home, out of our ability to remain strong as
one America.

All over the world people are being torn asunder by racial, ethnic and
religious conflicts that fuel fanaticism and terror. We are the world's
most diverse democracy, and the world looks to us to show that it is
possible to live and advance together across those kinds of differences.
America has always been a nation of immigrants.

From the start, a steady stream of people in search of freedom and
opportunity have left their own lands to make this land their home. We
started as an experiment in democracy fueled by Europeans. We have grown
into an experiment in democratic diversity fueled by openness and promise.

My fellow Americans, we must never, ever believe that our diversity is a
weakness; it is our greatest strength.

Americans speak every language, know every country. People on every
continent can look to us and see the reflection of their own great
potential, and they always will, as long as we strive to give all our
citizens, whatever their background, an opportunity to achieve their own
greatness.

We're not there yet. We still see evidence of a biting bigotry and
intolerance in ugly words and awful violence, in burned churches and bombed
buildings. We must fight against this in our country and in our hearts.

Just a few days before my second inauguration, one of our country's
best-known pastors, Reverend Robert Schuller, suggested that I read Isaiah
58:12. Here's what it says: "Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many
generations, and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, the
restorer of paths to dwell in."

I placed my hand on that verse when I took the oath of office, on behalf of
all Americans, for no matter what our differences in our faiths, our
backgrounds, our politics, we must all be repairers of the breach.

I want to say a word about two other Americans who show us how. Congressman
Frank Tejeda was buried yesterday, a proud American whose family came from
Mexico. He was only 51 years old. He was awarded the Silver Star, the
Bronze Star and the Purple Heart fighting for his country in Vietnam. And
he went on to serve Texas and America fighting for our future here in this
chamber.

We are grateful for his service and honored that his mother, Lillie Tejeda,
and his sister, Mary Alice, have come from Texas to be with us here
tonight. And we welcome you. Thank you.

Gary Locke, the newly-elected governor of Washington state, is the first
Chinese-American governor in the history of our country. He's the proud son
of two of the millions of Asian American immigrants who strengthened
America with their hard work, family values and good citizenship.

He represents the future we can all achieve. Thank you, governor, for being
here. Please stand up.

Reverend Schuller, Congressman Tejeda, Governor Locke, along with Kristen
Tanner and Chris Getsla, Sue Winski and Dr. Kristen Zarfos--they're all
Americans from different roots whose lives reflect the best of what we can
become when we are one America.

We may not share a common past, but we surely do share a common future.
Building one America is our most important mission, the foundation for many
generations of every other strength we must build for this new century.
Money cannot buy it, power cannot compel it, technology cannot create it.
It can only come from the human spirit.

America is far more than a place; it is an idea--the most powerful idea in
the history of nations, and all of us in this chamber, we are now the
bearers of that idea, leading a great people into a new world.

A child born tonight will have almost no memory of the 20th century.
Everything that child will know about America will be because of what we do
now to build a new century. We don't have a moment to waste.

Tomorrow there will be just over 1,000 days until the year 2000. One
thousand days to prepare our people. One thousand days to work together.
One thousand days to build a bridge to a land of new promise.

My fellow Americans, we have work to do. Let us seize those days and the
century.

Thank you. God bless you. And God bless America.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of the 105th Congress,
distinguished guests, my fellow Americans:

Since the last time we met in this chamber, America has lost two patriots
and fine public servants. Though they sat on opposite sides of the aisle,
Representatives Walter Capps and Sonny Bono shared a deep love for this
House and an unshakable commitment to improving the lives of all our
people.

In the past few weeks, they have both been eulogized. Tonight, I think we
should begin by sending a message to their families and their friends that
we celebrate their lives, and give thanks for their service to our nation.

For 209 years, it has been the president's duty to report to you on the
state of the union. Because of the hard work and high purpose of the
American people, these are good times for America. We have more than 14
million new jobs, the lowest unemployment in 24 years, the lowest core
inflation in 30 years, incomes are rising and we have the highest home
ownership in history. Crime has dropped for a record five years in a row,
and the welfare rolls are at their lowest levels in 27 years. Our
leadership in the world is unrivaled. Ladies and gentlemen, the state of
our union is strong.

But with barely 700 days left in the 20th century, this is not a time to
rest. It is a time to build--to build the America within reach, an America
where everybody has a chance to get ahead, with hard work; where every
citizen can live in a safe community; where families are strong, schools
are good, and all our young people can go on to college; an America where
scientists find cures for diseases from diabetes to Alzheimer's to AIDS; an
America where every child can stretch a hand across a keyboard and reach
every book ever written, every painting ever painted, every symphony ever
composed; where government provides opportunity and citizens honor the
responsibility to give something back to their communities; an America
which leads the world to new heights of peace and prosperity.

This is the America we have begun to build. This is the America we can
leave to our children--if we join together to finish the work at hand. Let
us strengthen our nation for the 21st century.

Rarely have Americans lived through so much change in so many ways in so
short a time. Quietly, but with gathering force, the ground has shifted
beneath our feet as we have moved into an information age, a global
economy, a truly new world.

For five years now, we have met the challenge of these changes as Americans
have at every turning point in our history, by renewing the very idea of
America, widening the circle of opportunity, deepening the meaning of our
freedom, forging a more perfect union. We shaped a new kind of government
for the information age. I thank the vice president for his leadership, and
the Congress for its support, in building a government that is leaner, more
flexible, a catalyst for new ideas, and most of all, a government that
gives the American people the tools they need to make the most of their own
lives.

We have moved past the sterile debate between those who say government is
the enemy and those who say government is the answer. My fellow Americans,
we have found a third way. We have the smallest government in 35 years, but
a more progressive one. We have a smaller government but a stronger
nation.

We are moving steadily toward a an even stronger America in the 21st
century--an economy that offers opportunity, a society rooted in
responsibility, and a nation that lives as a community.

First, Americans in this chamber and across this nation have pursued a new
strategy for prosperity: fiscal discipline to cut interest rates and spur
growth; investments in education and skills, in science and technology and
transportation, to prepare our people for the new economy; new markets for
American products and American workers.

When I took office, the deficit for 1998 was projected to be $357 billion,
and heading higher. This year, our deficit is projected to be $10 billion,
and heading lower.

For three decades, six presidents have come before you to warn of the
damage deficits pose to our nation. Tonight, I come before you to announce
that the federal deficit, once so incomprehensively large that it had 11
zeros, will be simply zero.

I will submit to Congress, for 1999, the first balanced budget in 30
years.

And if we hold fast to fiscal discipline, we may balance the budget this
year--four years ahead of schedule.

You can all be proud of that, because turning a sea of red ink into black
is no miracle. It is the product of hard work by the American people, and
of two visionary actions in Congress: The courageous vote in 1993 that led
to a cut in the deficit of 90 percent and the truly historic bipartisan
balanced budget agreement passed by this Congress.

Here's the really good news: If we maintain our resolve, we will produce
balanced budgets as far as the eye can see.

We must not go back to unwise spending or untargeted tax cuts that risk
reopening the deficit. Last year, together, we enacted targeted tax cuts so
that the typical middle class family will now have the lowest tax rates in
20 years.

My plan to balance the budget next year includes both new investments and
new tax cuts targeted to the needs of working families: for education, for
child care, for the environment.

But whether the issue is tax cuts or spending, I ask all of you to meet
this test: approve only those priorities that can actually be accomplished
without adding a dime to the deficit.

Now, if we balance the budget for next year, it is projected that we'll
then have a sizeable surplus in the years that immediately follow. What
should we do with this projected surplus?

I have a simple four-word answer: Save Social Security first.

Tonight, I propose that we reserve 100 percent of the surplus--that's
every penny of any surplus--until we have taken all the necessary measures
to strengthen the Social Security system for the 21st century.

Let us say--let us say to all Americans watching tonight, whether you're
70 or 50, or whether you just started paying into the system, Social
Security will be there when you need it. Let us make this commitment:
Social Security first. Let's do that--together.

I also want to say that all the American people who are watching us tonight
should be invited to join in this discussion, in facing these issues
squarely and forming a true consensus on how we should proceed. We'll start
by conducting nonpartisan forums in every region of the country, and I hope
that lawmakers of both parties will participate. We'll hold a White House
conference on Social Security in December. And one year from now, I will
convene the leaders of Congress to craft historic bipartisan legislation to
achieve a landmark for our generation, a Social Security system that is
strong in the 21st century.

In an economy that honors opportunity, all Americans must be able to reap
the rewards of prosperity. Because these times are good, we can afford to
take one simple, sensible step to help millions of workers struggling to
provide for their families. We should raise the minimum wage.

The information age is first and foremost an education age, in which
education will start at birth and continue throughout a lifetime. Last
year, from this podium, I said that education has to be our highest
priority. I laid out a 10-point plan to move us forward, and urged all of
us to let politics stop at the schoolhouse door.

Since then, this Congress--across party lines--and the American people
have responded, in the most important year for education in a generation--
expanding public school choice, opening the way to 3,000 charter schools,
working to connect every classroom in the country to the information
superhighway, committing to expand Head Start to a million children,
launching America Reads, sending literally thousands of college students
into our elementary schools to make sure all our 8-year-olds can read.

Last year I proposed--and you passed--220,000 new Pell Grant scholarships
for deserving students. Student loans, already less expensive and easier to
repay--now you get to deduct the interest. Families all over America now can
put their savings into new, tax-free education IRAs.

And this year, for the first two years of college, families will get a
$1500 tax credit--a Hope Scholarship that will cover the cost of most
community college tuition. And for junior and senior year, graduate school,
and job training, there is a lifetime learning credit. You did that, and
you should be very proud of it.

And because of these actions, I have something to say to every family
listening to us tonight: your children can go on to college. If you know a
child from a poor family, tell her not to give up, she can go on to
college. If you know a young couple struggling with bills, worried they
won't be able to send their children to college, tell them not to give up,
their children can go on to college. If you know somebody who's caught in a
dead-end job and afraid he can't afford the classes necessary to get better
jobs for the rest of his life, tell him not to give up, he can go on to
college.

Because of the things that have been done, we can make college as universal
in the 21st century as high school is today. And, my friends, that will
change the face and future of America.

We have opened wide the doors of the world's best system of higher
education. Now we must make our public elementary and secondary schools the
world's best as well--by raising standards, raising expectations and raising
accountability.

Thanks to the actions of this Congress last year, we will soon have, for
the very first time, a voluntary national test based on national standards
in fourth grade reading and eighth grade math.

Parents have a right to know whether their children are mastering the
basics. And every parent already knows the key; good teachers and small
classes.

Tonight, I propose the first ever national effort to reduce class size in
the early grades. My balanced budget will help to hire a hundred thousand
new teachers who have passed the state competency tests. Now with these
teachers--listen--with these teachers, we will actually be able to reduce
class size in the first, second and third grades to an average of 18
students a class all across America.

Now, if I've got the math right, more teachers teaching smaller classes
requires more classrooms. So I also propose a school construction tax cut
to help communities modernize or build 5,000 schools.

We must also demand greater accountability. When we promote a child from
grade to grade who hasn't mastered the work, we don't do that child any
favors. It is time to end social promotion in America's schools.

Last year, in Chicago, they made that decision--not to hold our children
back, but to lift them up. Chicago stopped social promotion and started
mandatory summer school to help students who are behind to catch up.

I propose to help other communities follow Chicago's lead. Let's say to
them stop promoting children who don't learn, and we will give you the
tools to make sure they do.

I also ask this Congress to support our efforts to enlist colleges and
universities to reach out to disadvantaged children starting in the sixth
grade so that they can get the guidance and hope they need so they can know
that they, too, will be able to go on to college.

As we enter the 21st century, the global economy requires us to seek
opportunity not just at home, but in all the markets of the world. We must
shape this global economy, not shrink from it.

In the last five years, we have led the way in opening new markets, with
240 trade agreements that remove foreign barriers to products bearing the
proud stamp, "Made in the USA." Today, record high exports account for
fully one-third of our economic growth. I want to keep them going, because
that's the way to keep America growing and to advance a safer, more stable
world.

Now, all of you know, whatever your views are, that I think this is a great
opportunity for America. I know there is opposition to more comprehensive
trade agreements. I have listened carefully, and I believe that the
opposition is rooted in two fears: first, that our trading partners will
have lower environmental and labor standards, which will give them an
unfair advantage in our market and do their own people no favors, even if
there's more business; and second, that if we have more trade, more of our
workers will lose their jobs and have to start over.

I think we should seek to advance worker and environmental standards around
the world. It should--I have made it abundantly clear that it should be a
part of our trade agenda, but we cannot influence other countries'
decisions if we send them a message that we're backing away from trade with
them.

This year I will send legislation to Congress, and ask other nations to
join us, to fight the most intolerable labor practice of all-abusive child
labor.

We should also offer help and hope to those Americans temporarily left
behind with the global marketplace or by the march of technology, which may
have nothing to do with trade. That's why we have more than doubled funding
for training dislocated workers since 1993. And if my new budget is
adopted, we will triple funding. That's why we must do more, and more
quickly, to help workers who lose their jobs for whatever reason.

You know, we help communities in a special way when their military base
closes. We ought to help them in the same way if their factory closes.
Again, I ask the Congress to continue its bipartisan work to consolidate
the tangle of training programs we have today into one single GI Bill for
Workers, a simple skills grant so people can, on their own, move quickly to
new jobs, to higher incomes and brighter futures.

Now, we all know in every way in life change is not always easy, but we
have to decide whether we're going to try to hold it back and hide from it,
or reap its benefits. And remember the big picture here: while we've been
entering into hundreds of new trade agreements, we've been creating
millions of new jobs. So this year we will forge new partnerships with
Latin America, Asia and Europe, and we should pass the new African Trade
Act. It has bipartisan support.

I will also renew my request for the fast-track negotiating authority
necessary to open more new markets, created more new jobs, which every
president has had for two decades.

You know, whether we like it or not, in ways that are mostly positive, the
world's economies are more and more interconnected and interdependent.
Today, an economic crisis anywhere can affect economies everywhere. Recent
months have brought serious financial problems to Thailand, Indonesia,
South Korea and beyond.

Now why should Americans be concerned about this?

First, these countries are our customers. If they sink into recession, they
won't be able to buy the goods we'd like to sell them.

Second, they're also our competitors, so if their currencies lose their
value and go down, then the price of their goods will drop, flooding our
market and others with much cheaper goods, which makes it a lot tougher for
our people to compete.

And finally, they are our strategic partners. Their stability bolsters our
security.

The American economy remains sound and strong, and I want to keep it that
way. But because the turmoil in Asia will have an impact on all the world's
economies, including ours, making that negative impact as small as possible
is the right thing to do for America, and the right thing to do for a safer
world.

Our policy is clear: no nation can recover if it does not reform itself,
but when nations are willing to undertake serious economic reform, we
should help them do it. So I call on Congress to renew America's commitment
to the International Monetary Fund.

And I think we should say to all the people we're trying to represent here,
that preparing for a far off storm that may reach our shores is far wiser
than ignoring the thunder 'til the clouds are just overhead.

A strong nation rests on the rock of responsibility. A society rooted in
responsibility must first promote the value of work, not welfare. We could
be proud that after decades of finger-pointing and failure, together we
ended the old welfare system. And we're now replacing welfare checks with
paychecks.

Last year, after a record four-year decline in welfare rolls I challenged
our nation to move two million more Americans off welfare by the year 2000.
I'm pleased to report we have also met that goal two full years ahead of
schedule.

This is a grand achievement, the sum of many acts of individual courage,
persistence and hope.

For 13 years, Elaine Kinslow of Indianapolis, Indiana was on and off
welfare. Today she's a dispatcher with a van company. She's saved enough
money to move her family into a good neighborhood. And she's helping other
welfare recipients go to work.

Elaine Kinslow and all those like her are the real heroes of the welfare
revolution. There are millions like her all across America, and I am happy
she could join the first lady tonight. Elaine, we're very proud of you.
Please stand up.

We still have a lot more to do, all of us, to make welfare reform a
success; providing child care, helping families move closer to available
jobs, challenging more companies to join our Welfare to Work Partnership,
increasing child-support collections from deadbeat parents who have a duty
to support their own children. I also want to thank Congress for restoring
some of the benefits to immigrants who are here legally and working hard.
And I hope you will finish that job this year.

We have to make it possible for all hard-working families to meet their
most important responsibilities. Two years ago, we helped guarantee that
Americans can keep their health insurance when they changed jobs. Last
year, we extended health care to up to 5 million children. This year, I
challenge Congress to take the next historic steps. A hundred and sixty
million of our fellow citizens are in managed care plans. These plans save
money, and they can improve care. But medical decisions ought to be made by
medical doctors, not insurance company accountants.

I urge this Congress to reach across the aisle and write into law a
consumer bill of rights that says this: You have the right to know all your
medical options, not just the cheapest. You have the right to choose the
doctor you want for the care you need. You have the right to emergency room
care wherever and whenever you need it. You have the right to keep your
medical records confidential.

Now, traditional care or managed care, every American deserves quality
care. Millions of Americans between the ages of 55 and 65 have lost their
health insurance. Some are retired. Some are laid off. Some lose their
coverage when their spouses retire. After a lifetime of work, they're left
with nowhere to turn.

So I ask the Congress, let these hard-working Americans buy into the
Medicare system. It won't add a dime to the deficit, but the peace of mind
it will provide will be priceless.

Next, we must help parents protect their children from the gravest health
threat that they face: an epidemic of teen smoking spread by multimillion
dollar marketing campaigns. I challenge Congress. Let's pass bipartisan,
comprehensive legislation that will improve public health, protect our
tobacco farmers, and change the way tobacco companies do business forever.

Let's do what it takes to bring teen smoking down. Let's raise the price of
cigarettes by up to $1.50 a pack over the next 10 years, with penalties on
the tobacco industry if it keeps marketing to our children.

Now tomorrow, like every day, 3,000 children will start smoking, and a
thousand will die early as a result. Let this Congress be remembered as the
Congress that saved their lives.

In the new economy, most parents work harder than ever. They face a
constant struggle to balance their obligations to be good workers, and
their even more important obligations to be good parents.

The Family and Medical Leave Act was the very first bill I was privileged
to sign into law as president in 1993. Since then, about 15 million people
have taken advantage of it, and I've met a lot of them all across this
country. I ask you to extend the law to cover 10 million more workers, and
to give parents time off when they have to go see their children's teachers
or take them to the doctor.

Child care is the next frontier we must face to enable people to succeed at
home and at work. Last year, I co-hosted the very first White House
conference on child care with one of our foremost experts, America's first
lady. From all corners of America, we heard the same message--without regard
to region or income or political affiliation--we've got to raise the quality
of child care, we've got to make it safer, we've got to make it more
affordable.

So here's my plan: Help families to pay for child care for a million more
children; scholarships and background checks for child-care workers, and a
new emphasis on early learning; tax credits for businesses that provide
child care for their employees; and a larger child-care tax credit for
working families.

Now, if you pass my plan, what this means is that a family of four with an
income of $35,000 and high child-care costs will no longer pay a single
penny of federal income tax.

You know, I think this is such a big issue with me because of my own
personal experience. I have often wondered how my mother, when she was a
young widow, would have been able to go away to school and get an education
and come back and support me, if my grandparents hadn't been able to take
care of me. She and I were really very lucky.

How many other families have never had that same opportunity? The truth is,
we don't know the answer to that question, but we do know what the answer
should be. Not a single American family should ever have to choose between
the job they need and the child they love.

A society rooted in responsibility must provide safe streets, safe schools,
and safe neighborhoods. We pursued a strategy of more police, tougher
punishment, smarter prevention with crime-fighting partnerships, with local
law enforcement and citizen groups, where the rubber hits the road.

I can report to you tonight that it's working. Violent crime is down,
robbery is down, assault is down, burglary is down for five years in a row
all across America. Now, we need to finish the job of putting 100,000 more
police on our streets.

Again, I ask Congress to pass a juvenile crime bill that provides more
prosecutors and probation officers to crack down on gangs and guns and
drugs and bar violent juveniles from buying guns for life. And I ask you to
dramatically expand our support for after-school programs. I think every
American should know that most juvenile crime is committed between the
hours of 3:00 in the afternoon and 8:00 at night. We can keep so many of
our children out of trouble in the first place if we give them some place
to go other than the streets, and we ought to do it.

Drug use is on the decline. I thank General McCaffrey for his leadership,
and I thank this Congress for passing the largest anti-drug budget in
history. Now I ask you to join me in a ground-breaking effort to hire a
thousand new Border Patrol agents and to deploy the most sophisticated
available new technologies to help close the door on drugs at our borders.

Police, prosecutors, and prevention programs, good as they are, they can't
work if our court system doesn't work. Today, there are large numbers of
vacancies in our federal courts. Here is what the chief justice of the
United States wrote: "Judicial vacancies cannot remain at such high levels
indefinitely without eroding the quality of justice."

I simply ask the United States Senate to heed this plea and vote on the
highly qualified nominees before you, up or down.

We must exercise responsibility not just at home but around the world. On
the eve of a new century, we have the power and the duty to build a new era
of peace and security. But make no mistake about it; today's possibilities
are not tomorrow's guarantees. America must stand against the poisoned
appeals of extreme nationalism. We must combat an unholy access of new
threats from terrorists, international criminals and drug traffickers.

These 21st century predators feed on technology and the free flow of
information and ideas and people, and they will be all the more lethal if
weapons of mass destruction fall into their hands. To meet these
challenges, we are helping to write international rules of the road for the
21st century, protecting those who join the family of nations and isolating
those who do not.

Within days, I will ask the Senate for its advice and consent to make
Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic the newest members of NATO. For 50
years, NATO contained communism and kept America and Europe secure. Now
these three formerly communist countries have said yes to democracy. I ask
the Senate to say yes to them, our new allies.

By taking in new members and working closely with new partners, including
Russia and Ukraine, NATO can help to assure that Europe is a stronghold for
peace in the 21st century.

Next, I will ask Congress to continue its support for our troops and their
mission in Bosnia. This Christmas, Hillary and I traveled to Sarajevo with
Senator and Mrs. Dole and a bipartisan congressional delegation. We saw
children playing in the streets where, two years ago, they were hiding from
snipers and shells. The shops were filled with food. The cafes were alive
with conversation. The progress there is unmistakable; but it is not yet
irreversible.

To take firm root, Bosnia's fragile peace still needs the support of
American and allied troops when the current NATO mission ends in June. I
think Senator Dole actually said it best. He said: "This is like being
ahead in the fourth quarter of a football game; now is not the time to walk
off the field and forfeit the victory."

I wish all of you could have seen our troops in Tuzla. They're very proud
of what they are doing in Bosnia, and we're all very proud of them. One of
those--one of those brave soldiers is sitting with the first lady tonight:
Army Sergeant Michael Tolbert. His father was a decorated Vietnam vet.
After college in Colorado, he joined the Army. Last year he led an infantry
unit that stopped a mob of extremists from taking over a radio station that
is a voice of democracy and tolerance in Bosnia. Thank you very much,
Sergeant, for what you represent.

In Bosnia and around the world, our men and women in uniform always do
their mission well. Our mission must be to keep them well-trained and
ready, to improve their quality of life, and to provide the 21st century
weapons they need to defeat any enemy.

I ask Congress to join me in pursuing an ambitious agenda to reduce the
serious threat of weapons of mass destruction. This year, four decades
after it was first proposed by President Eisenhower, a Comprehensive
Nuclear Test Ban is within reach. By ending nuclear testing, we can help to
prevent the development of new and more dangerous weapons, and make it more
difficult for non-nuclear states to build them.

I am pleased to announce that four former chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff--Generals John Shalikashvili, Colin Powell and David Jones, and
Admiral William Crowe--have endorsed this treaty, and I ask the Senate to
approve it this year.

Together we must also confront the new hazards of chemical and biological
weapons, and the outlaw states, terrorists and organized criminals seeking
to acquire them.

Saddam Hussein has spent the better part of this decade, and much of his
nation's wealth, not on providing for the Iraqi people, but on developing
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.

The United Nations weapons inspectors have done a truly remarkable job,
finding and destroying more of Iraq's arsenal than was destroyed during the
entire gulf war. Now, Saddam Hussein wants to stop them from completing
their mission.

I know I speak for everyone in this chamber, Republicans and Democrats,
when I say to Saddam Hussein, "You cannot defy the will of the world," and
when I say to him, "You have used weapons of mass destruction before; we
are determined to deny you the capacity to use them again."

Last year, the Senate ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention to protect
our soldiers and citizens from poison gas. Now we must act to prevent the
use of disease as a weapon of war and terror. The Biological Weapons
Convention has been in effect for 23 years now. The rules are good, but the
enforcement is weak. We must strengthen it with a new international
inspection system to detect and deter cheating. In the months ahead, I will
pursue our security strategy with old allies in Asia and Europe, and new
partners from Africa to India and Pakistan, from South America to China.
And from Belfast to Korea to the Middle East, America will continue to
stand with those who stand for peace.

Finally, it's long past time to make good on our debt to the United
Nations.

More and more we are working with other nations to achieve common goals. If
we want America to lead, we've got to set a good example. As we see--as we
see so clearly in Bosnia, allies who share our goals can also share our
burdens. In this new era, our freedom and independence are actually
enriched, not weakened, by our increasing interdependence with other
nations. But we have to do our part.

Our founders set America on a permanent course toward a more perfect union.
To all of you, I say, it is a journey we can only make together, living as
one community.

First, we have to continue to reform our government, the instrument of our
national community. Everyone knows elections have become too expensive,
fueling a fund-raising arms race.

This year, by March the 6th, at long last the Senate will actually vote on
bipartisan campaign finance reform proposed by senators McCain and
Feingold. Let's be clear; a vote against McCain-Feingold is a vote for soft
money and for the status quo. I ask you to strengthen our democracy and
pass campaign finance reform this year.

But at least equally important, we have to address the real reason for the
explosion in campaign costs: the high cost of media advertising. I will--
for the folks watching at home, those were the groans of pain in the
audience--I will formally request that the Federal Communications
Commission act to provide free or reduced-cost television time--for
candidates who observe spending limits voluntarily. The airwaves are a
public trust, and broadcasters also have to help us in this effort to
strengthen our democracy.

Under the leadership of Vice President Gore, we have reduced the federal
payroll by 300,000 workers, cut 16,000 pages of regulation, eliminated
hundreds of programs and improved the operations of virtually every
government agency. But we can do more.

Like every taxpayer, I'm outraged by the reports of abuses by the IRS. We
need some changes there: new citizen advocacy panels, a stronger taxpayer
advocate, phone lines open 24 hours a day, relief for innocent taxpayers.

Last year, by an overwhelming bipartisan margin, the House of
Representatives passed sweeping IRS reforms. This bill must not now
languish in the Senate. Tonight, I ask the Senate: Follow the House; pass
the bipartisan package as your first order of business. I hope to goodness
before I finish I can think of something to say 'Follow the Senate' on so
I'll be out of trouble!

A nation that lives as a community must value all its communities. For the
past five years, we have worked to bring the spark of private enterprise to
inner city and poor rural areas with community development banks, more
commercial loans into poor neighborhoods, cleanup of polluted sites for
development.

Under the continued leadership of the vice president, we propose to triple
the number of empowerment zones to give business incentives to invest in
those areas. We should. We should also give poor families more help to move
into homes of their own, and we should use tax cuts to spur the
construction of more low-income housing.

Last year, this Congress took strong action to help the District of
Columbia. Let us renew our resolve to make our capital city a great city
for all who live and visit here.

Our cities are the vibrant hubs of great metropolitan areas. They are still
the gateway for new immigrants from every continent who come here to work
for their own American dreams. Let's keep our cities going strong into the
21st Century. They're a very important part of our future.

Our communities are only as healthy as the air our children breathe, the
water they drink, the Earth they will inherit. Last year we put in place
the toughest-ever controls on smog and soot. We moved to protect
Yellowstone, the Everglades, Lake Tahoe. We expanded every community's
right to know about toxics that threaten their children.

Just yesterday, our food safety plan took effect, using new science to
protect consumers from dangers like e. coli and salmonella.

Tonight, I ask you to join me in launching a new Clean Water initiative, a
far-reaching effort to clean our rivers, our lakes and our coastal waters
for our children.

Our overriding environmental challenge tonight is the worldwide problem of
climate change, global warming, the gathering crisis that requires
worldwide action. The vast majority of scientists have concluded
unequivocally that if we don't reduce the emission of greenhouse gases at
some point in the next century, we'll disrupt our climate and put our
children and grandchildren at risk.

This past December, America led the world to reach a historic agreement
committing our nation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through market
forces, new technologies, energy efficiency.

We have it in our power to act right here, right now. I propose $6 billion
in tax cuts, in research and development, to encourage innovation,
renewable energy, fuel-efficient cars, energy-efficient homes. Every time
we have acted to heal our environment, pessimists have told us it would
hurt the economy. Well, today our economy is the strongest in a generation,
and our environment is the cleanest in a generation. We have always found a
way to clean the environment and grow the economy at the same time. And
when it comes to global warming, we'll do it again.

Finally, community means living by the defining American value, the ideal
heard 'round the world: that we're all created equal. Throughout our
history, we haven't always honored that ideal, and we've never fully lived
up to it. Often it's easier to believe that our differences matter more
than what we have in common. It may be easier, but it's wrong.

What we have to do in our day and generation to make sure that America
truly becomes one nation, what do we have to do? We're becoming more and
more and more diverse. Do you believe we can become one nation? The answer
cannot be to dwell on our differences, but to build on our shared values.

And we all cherish family and faith, freedom and responsibility. We all
want our children to grow up in the world where their talents are matched
by their opportunities.

I've launched this national initiative on race to help us recognize our
common interests and to bridge the opportunity gaps that are keeping us
from becoming one America. Let us begin by recognizing what we still must
overcome.

Discrimination against any American is un-American. We must vigorously
enforce the laws that make it illegal. I ask your help to end the backlog
at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Sixty thousand of our
fellow citizens are waiting in line for justice, and we should act now to
end their wait.

We should also recognize that the greatest progress we can make toward
building one America lies in the progress we make for all Americans,
without regard to race. When we open the doors of college to all Americans,
when we rid all our streets of crime, when there are jobs available to
people from all our neighborhoods, when we make sure all parents have the
child care they need, we're helping to build one nation.

We in this chamber and in this government must do all we can to address the
continuing American challenge to build one America. But we'll only move
forward if all our fellow citizens, including every one of you at home
watching tonight, is also committed to this cause.

We must work together, learn together, live together, serve together. On
the forge of common enterprise, Americans of all backgrounds can hammer out
a common identity.

We see it today in the United States military, in the Peace Corps, in
AmeriCorps. Wherever people of all races and backgrounds come together in a
shared endeavor and get a fair chance, we do just fine. With shared values
and meaningful opportunities and honest communications and citizen service,
we can unite a diverse people in freedom and mutual respect. We are many.
We must be one.

In that spirit, let us lift our eyes to the new millennium. How will we
mark that passage? It just happens once every thousand years. This year,
Hillary and I launched the White House Millennium Program to promote
America's creativity and innovation and to preserve our heritage and
culture into the 21st century. Our culture lives in every community, and
every community has places of historic value that tell our stories as
Americans. We should protect them.

I am proposing a public-private partnership to advance our arts and
humanities and to celebrate the millennium by saving America's treasures
great and small. And while we honor the past, let us imagine the future.

Now, think about this. The entire store of human knowledge now doubles
every five years. In the 1980s, scientists identified the gene causing
cystic fibrosis; it took nine years. Last year, scientists located the gene
that causes Parkinson's disease--in only nine days! Within a decade, gene
chips will offer a road map for prevention of illnesses throughout a
lifetime. Soon, we'll be able to carry all the phone calls on Mother's Day
on a single strand of fiber the width of a human hair. A child born in 1998
may well live to see the 22nd century.

Tonight, as part of our gift to the millennium, I propose a 21st Century
research fund for pathbreaking scientific inquiry, the largest funding
increase in history for the National Institutes of Health, the National
Science Foundation, and the National Cancer Institute. We have already
discovered we have already discovered genes for breast cancer and diabetes.
I ask you to support this initiative so ours will be the generation that
finally wins the war against cancer and begins a revolution in our fight
against all deadly diseases.

As important as all this scientific progress is, we must continue to see
that science serves humanity, not the other way around. We must prevent the
misuse of genetic tests to discriminate against any American, and we must
ratify the ethical consensus of the scientific and religious communities,
and ban the cloning of human beings.

We should enable all the world's people to explore the far reaches of
cyberspace. Think of this: the first time I made a State of the Union
speech to you, only a handful of physicists used the World Wide Web--
literally just a handful of people.

Now in schools and libraries, homes and businesses, millions and millions
of Americans surf the Net every day.

We must give parents the tools they need to help protect their children
from inappropriate material on the Net, but we also must make sure that we
protect the exploding, global commercial potential of the Internet. We can
do the kinds of things that we need to do and still protect our kids. For
one thing, I ask Congress to step up support for building the next
generation Internet. It's getting kind of clogged, you know. And the next
generation Internet will operate at speeds up to a thousand times faster
than today.

Even as we explore this inner space, in the new millennium we're going to
open new frontiers in outer space.

Throughout all history, human kind has had only one place to call home: our
planet Earth. Beginning this year, 1998, men and women from 16 countries
will build a foothold in the heavens--the International Space Station. With
its vast expanses, scientists and engineers will actually set sail on an
uncharted sea of limitless mystery and unlimited potential.

And this October, a true American hero, a veteran pilot of 149 combat
missions and one five-hour space flight that changed the world, will return
to the heavens. Godspeed, John Glenn!

John, you will carry with you America's hopes, and on your uniform once
again you will carry America's flag, marking the unbroken connection
between the deeds of America's past and the daring of America's future.

Nearly 200 years ago, a tattered flag, its broad stripes and bright stars
still gleaming through the smoke of a fierce battle, moved Francis Scott
Key to scribble a few words on the back of an envelope, the words that
became our National Anthem. Today, that Star-Spangled Banner, along with
the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights,
are on display just a short walk from here. They are America's treasures.
And we must also save them for the ages.

I ask all Americans to support our project to restore all our treasures so
that the generations of the 21st century can see for themselves the images
and the words that are the old and continuing glory of America, an America
that has continued to rise through every age against every challenge, a
people of great works and greater possibilities, who have always, always
found the wisdom and strength to come together as one nation, to widen the
circle of opportunity, to deepen the meaning of our freedom, to form that
more perfect union.

Let that be our gift to the 21st century.

God bless you, and God bless the United States.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, honored guests, my
fellow Americans:

Tonight I have the honor of reporting to you on the State of the Union.

Let me begin by saluting the new speaker of the House and thanking him
especially tonight for extending an invitation to two guests sitting in the
gallery with Mrs. Hastert. Lyn Gibson and Wei Ling Chestnut are the widows
of the two brave Capitol Hill police officers who gave their lives to
defend freedom's house.

Mr. Speaker, at your swearing in you asked us all to work together in a
spirit of civility and bipartisanship. Mr. Speaker, let's do exactly that.

Tonight, I stand before you to report that America has created the longest
peacetime economic expansion in our history. With nearly 18 million new
jobs, wages rising at more than twice the rate of inflation, the highest
homeownership in history, the smallest welfare roles in 30 years, and the
lowest peacetime unemployment since 1957.

For the first time in three decades, the budget is balanced. From a deficit
of $290 billion in 1992, we had a surplus of $70 billion last year. And
now, we are on course for budget surpluses for the next 25 years.

Thanks to the pioneering leadership of all of you, we have the lowest
violent crime rate in a quarter century and the cleanest environment in a
quarter century.

America is a strong force for peace--from Northern Ireland to Bosnia to
the Middle East.

Thanks to the leadership of Vice President Gore, we have a government for
the Information Age, once again a government that is a progressive
instrument of the common good, rooted in our oldest values of opportunity,
responsibility and community, devoted to fiscal responsibility, determined
to give our people the tools they need to make the most of their own lives
in the 21st century, a 21st century government for 21st century America.

My fellow Americans, I stand before you tonight to report that the state of
our union is strong. Now, America is working again. The promise of our
future is limitless. But we cannot realize that promise if we allow the hum
of our prosperity to lull us into complacency. How we fare as a nation far
into the 21st century depends upon what we do as a nation today.

So, with our budget surplus growing, our economy expanding, our confidence
rising, now is the moment for this generation to meet our historic
responsibility to the 21st century.

Our fiscal discipline gives us an unsurpassed opportunity to address a
remarkable new challenge, the aging of America. With the number of elderly
Americans set to double by 2030, the baby boom will become a senior boom.

So first and above all, we must save Social Security for the 21st century.

Early in this century, being old meant being poor. When President Roosevelt
created Social Security, thousands wrote to thank him for eliminating what
one woman called "the stark terror of penniless, helpless old age." Even
today, without Social Security, half our nation's elderly would be forced
into poverty.

Today, Social Security is strong, but by 2013, payroll taxes will no longer
be sufficient to cover monthly payments. By 2032, the trust fund will be
exhausted and Social Security will be unable to pay the full benefits older
Americans have been promised.

The best way to keep Social Security a rock solid guarantee is not to make
drastic cuts in benefits; not to raise payroll tax rates; not to drain
resources from Social Security in the name of saving it. Instead, I propose
that we make the historic decision to invest the surplus to save Social
Security.

Specifically, I propose that we commit 60 percent of the budget surplus for
the next 15 years to Social Security, investing a small portion in the
private sector just as any private or state government pension would do.
This will earn a higher return and keep Social Security sound for 55
years.

But we must aim higher. We should put Social Security on a sound footing
for the next 75 years. We should reduce poverty among elderly women, who
are nearly twice as likely to be poor as are other seniors. And we should
eliminate the limits on what seniors on Social Security can earn.

Now, these changes will require difficult, but fully achievable choices
over and above the dedication of the surplus. They must be made on a
bipartisan basis. They should be made this year. So let me say to you
tonight, I reach out my hand to all of you in both houses in both parties
and ask that we join together in saying to the American people, we will
save Social Security now.

Now, last year, we wisely reserved all of the surplus until we knew what it
would take to save Social Security. Again, I say, we shouldn't spend any of
it, not any of it, until after Social Security is truly saved. First
thing's first.

Second, once we have saved Social Security, we must fulfill our obligation
to save and improve Medicare. Already we have extended the life of the
Medicare trust fund by 10 years, but we should extend it for at least
another decade. Tonight, I propose that we use one out of every six dollars
in the surplus for the next 15 years to guarantee the soundness of Medicare
until the year 2020.

But, again--but, again, we should aim higher. We must be willing to work
in a bipartisan way and look at new ideas, including the upcoming report of
the Bipartisan Medicare Commission. If we work together, we can secure
Medicare for the next two decades and cover the greatest growing need of
seniors--affordable prescription drugs.

Third, we must help all Americans from their first day on the job to save,
to invest, to create wealth.

From its beginnings, Americans have supplemented Social Security with
private pensions and savings. Yet today millions of people retire with
little to live on other than Social Security. Americans living longer than
ever simply must save more than ever.

Therefore, in addition to saving Social Security and Medicare, I propose a
new pension initiative for retirement security in the 21st century. I
propose that we use a little over 11 percent of the surplus to establish
universal savings accounts--USA accounts--to give all Americans the means
to save.

With these new accounts, Americans can invest as they choose and receive
funds to match a portion of their savings with extra help for those least
able to save. USA accounts will help all Americans to share in our nation's
wealth and to enjoy a more secure retirement. I ask you to support them.

Fourth, we must invest in long-term care.

I propose a tax credit of $1,000 for the aged, ailing or disabled and the
families who care for them. Long-term care will become a bigger and bigger
challenge with the aging of America--and we must do more to help our
families deal with it.

I was born in 1946, the first year of the baby boom. I can tell you that
one of the greatest concerns of our generation is our absolute
determination not to let our growing old place an intolerable burden on our
children and their ability to raise our grandchildren.

Our economic success and our fiscal discipline now give us the opportunity
to lift that burden from their shoulders, and we should take it.

Saving Social Security, Medicare, creating U.S. accounts, this is the right
way to use the surplus. If we do so, if we do so, we will still have
resources to meet critical needs and education and defense.

And I want to point out that this proposal is fiscally sound. Listen to
this, if we set aside 60 percent of the surplus for Social Security and 16
percent for Medicare over the next 15 years, that savings will achieve the
lowest level of publicly-held debt since right before World War I in 1917.

So with these four measures; saving Social Security, strengthening
Medicare, establishing the USA accounts, supporting long-term care, we can
begin to meet our generation's historic responsibility to establish true
security for 21st century seniors.

Now, there are more children, from more diverse backgrounds, in our public
schools that any time in our history. Their education must provide the
knowledge and nurture the creativity that will allow our entire nation to
thrive in the new economy.

Today we can say something we couldn't say six years ago. With tax credits
and more affordable student loans, with more work-study grants and more
Pell Grants, with education IRAs, the new HOPE Scholarship tax cut that
more than five million Americans will receive this year, we have finally
opened the doors of college to all Americans.

With our support, nearly every state has set higher academic standards for
public schools and a voluntary national test is being developed to measure
the progress of our students. With over $1 billion in discounts available
this year, we are well on our way to our goal of connecting every classroom
and library to the Internet.

Last fall, you passed our proposal to start hiring 100,000 new teachers to
reduce class size in the early grades. Now I ask you to finish the job.

You know our children are doing better. SAT scores are up. Math scores have
risen in nearly all grades. But there's a problem. While our fourth-graders
out performed their peers in other countries in math and science, our
eighth-graders are around average, and our 12th-graders rank near the
bottom. We must do better.

Now each year the national government invests more than $15 billion in our
public schools. I believe we must change the way we invest that money to
support what works and to stop supporting what does not work.

First, later this year I will send to Congress a plan that for the first
time holds states and school districts accountable for progress and rewards
them for results. My Education Accountability Act will require every school
district receiving federal help to take the following five steps:

First, all schools must end social promotion.

Now, no child, no child should graduate from high school with a diploma he
or she can't read. We do our children no favors when we allow them to pass
from grade to grade without mastering the material. But we can't just hold
students back because the system fails them.

So my balanced budget triples the funding for summer school and
after-school programs to keep a million children learning. Now, if--if you
doubt this will work, just look at Chicago, which ended social promotion
and made summer school mandatory for those who don't master the basics.
Math and reading scores are up three years running with some of the biggest
gains in some of the poorest neighborhoods. It will work, and we should do
it.

Second, all states and school districts must turn around their worst
performing schools or shut them down. That's the policy established in
North Carolina by Governor Jim Hunt. North Carolina made the biggest gains
in test scores in the nation last year. Our budget includes $200 million to
help states turn around their own failing schools.

Third, all states and school districts must be held responsible for the
quality of their teachers. The great majority of our teachers do a fine
job, but in too many schools teachers don't have college majors or even
minors in the subjects they teach. New teachers should be required to pass
performance exams, and all teachers should know the subject their
teaching.

This year's balanced budget contains resources to help them reach higher
standards. And to attract talented young teachers to the toughest
assignments, I recommend a six-fold increase in our program for college
scholarships for students who commit to teach in the inner-cities and
isolated rural areas and in Indian communities. Let us bring excellence to
every part of America.

Fourth, we must empower parents with more information and more choices. In
too many communities it's easier to get information on the quality of the
local restaurants than on the quality of the local schools.

Every school district should issue report cards on every school. And
parents should be given more choices in selecting their public schools.

When I became president, there was just one independent public charter
school in all America. With our support on a bipartisan basis, today there
are 1,100. My budget assures that early in the next century, there will be
3,000.

Fifth, to assure that our classrooms are truly places of learning, and to
respond to what teachers have been asking us to do for years, we should say
that all states and school districts must both adopt and implement sensible
discipline policies.

Now let's do one more thing for our children. Today, too many schools are
so old they're falling apart, or so overcrowded students are learning in
trailers. Last fall, Congress missed the opportunity to change that. This
year, with 53 million children in our schools, Congress must not miss that
opportunity again. I ask you to help our communities build or modernize
5,000 schools.

If we do these things--end social promotion, turn around failing schools,
build modern ones, support qualified teachers, promote innovation,
competition and discipline--then we will begin to meet our generation's
historic responsibility to create to 21st century schools.

Now, we also have to do more to support the millions of parents who give
their all every day at home and at work.

The most basic tool of all is a decent income. So let's raise the minimum
wage by a dollar an hour over the next two years.

And let's make sure that women and men get equal pay for equal work by
strengthening enforcement of the equal pay laws.

That was encouraging, you know? There was more balance on the seesaw. I
like that. Let's give them a hand. That's great.

Working parents also need quality child care. So, again this year, I ask
Congress to support our plan for tax credits and subsidies for working
families, for improved safety and quality, for expanded after-school
program. And our plan also includes a new tax credit for stay-at-home
parents, too. They need support as well.

Parents should never have to worry about choosing between their children
and their work. Now, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the very first bill
I signed into law, has now, since 1993, helped millions and millions of
Americans to care for a newborn baby or an ailing relative without risking
their jobs. I think it's time, with all of the evidence that it has been so
little burdensome to employers, to extend family leave to 10 million more
Americans working for smaller companies, and I hope you will support it.

Finally, on the matter of work, parents should never have to face
discrimination in the workplace. So I want to ask Congress to prohibit
companies from refusing to hire or promote workers simply because they have
children. That is not right.

America's families deserve the world's best medical care. Thanks to
bipartisan federal support for medical research, we are not on the verge of
new treatments to prevent or delay diseases from Parkinson's to Alzheimer's
to arthritis to cancer. But as we continue our advances in medical science,
we can't let our medical system lag behind.

Managed care has literally transformed medicine in America, driving down
costs, but threatening to drive down quality as well.

I think we ought to say to every American, you should have the right to
know all you medical options, not just the cheapest. If you need a
specialist, you should have a right to see one. You have a right to the
nearest emergency care if you're in an accident. These are things that we
ought to say. And I think we ought to say you should have a right to keep
your doctor during a period of treatment whether it's a pregnancy or a
chemotherapy treatment or anything else. I believe this.

Now I've ordered these rights to be extended to the 85 million Americans
served by Medicare, Medicaid and other federal health programs. But only
Congress can pass a Patients' Bill of Rights for all Americans.

Last year, Congress missed that opportunity, and we must not miss that
opportunity again. For the sake of our families, I ask us to join together
across party lines and pass a strong enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights.

As more of our medical records are stored electronically, the threats to
all of our privacy increase. Because Congress has given me the authority to
act if it does not do so by August, one way or another, we can all say to
the American people, we will protect the privacy of medical records this
year.

Now, two years ago, we acted to extend health coverage to up to five
million children. Now we should go beyond that. We should make it easier
for small businesses to offer health insurance. We should give people
between the ages of 55 and 65 who lose their health insurance the chance to
buy into Medicare.

And we should continue to ensure access to family planning. No one should
have to choose between keeping health care and taking a job. And therefore,
I especially ask you tonight to join hands to pass the landmark bipartisan
legislation proposed by Sens. Kennedy and Jeffords, Roth and Moynihan, to
allow people with disabilities to keep their health insurance when they go
to work.

We need to enable our public hospitals, our community, our university
health centers to provide basic, affordable care for all the millions of
working families who don't have any insurance. They do a lot of that today,
but much more can be done. And my balanced budget makes a good down payment
toward that goal. I hope you will think about them and support that
provision.

Let me say we must step up our efforts to treat and prevent mental illness.
No American should ever be able--afraid ever to address this disease. This
year we will host a White House Conference on Mental Health. With
sensitivity, commitment and passion, Tipper Gore is leading our efforts
here, and I'd like to thank her for what she's done. Thank you. Thank you.

As everyone knows, our children are targets of a massive media campaign to
hook them on cigarettes. Now, I ask this Congress to resist the tobacco
lobby, to reaffirm the FDA's authority to protect our children from tobacco
and to hold tobacco companies accountable, while protecting tobacco
farmers.

Smoking has cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars under Medicare
and other programs. You know, the states have been right about this.
Taxpayers shouldn't pay for the cost of lung cancer, emphysema, and other
smoking-related illnesses, the tobacco companies should.

So tonight I announce that the Justice Department is preparing a litigation
plan to take the tobacco companies to court and with the funds we recover
to strengthen Medicare.

Now, if we act in these areas--minimum wage, family leave, child care,
health care, the safety of our children--then we will begin to meet our
generation's historic responsibilities to strengthen our families for the
21st century.

Today, America is the most dynamic, competitive, job-creating economy in
history, but we can do even better in building a 21st century economy that
embraces all Americans.

Today's income gap is largely a skills gap. Last year, the Congress passed
a law enabling workers to get a skills grant to choose the training they
need. And I applaud all of you here who were part of that.

This year, I recommend a five-year commitment to the new system, so that we
can provide over the next five years appropriate training opportunities for
all Americans who lose their jobs and expand rapid response teams to help
all towns which have been really hurt when businesses close. I hope you
will support this.

Also, I ask your support for a dramatic increase in federal support for
adult literacy to mount a national campaign aimed at helping the millions
and millions of working people who still read at less than a fifth-grade
level. We need to do this.

Here's some good news. In the past six years, we have cut the welfare rolls
nearly in half.

Two years ago, from this podium, I asked five companies to lead a national
effort to hire people off welfare. Tonight our welfare-to-work partnership
includes 10,000 companies who have hired hundreds of thousands of people,
and our balanced budget will help another 200,000 people move to the
dignity and pride of work. I hope you will support it.

We must bring the spark of private enterprise to every corner of America,
to build a bridge from Wall Street to Appalachia to the Mississippi Delta,
to our Native American communities, with more support for community
development banks for empowerment zones, for 100,000 more vouchers for
affordable housing.

And I ask Congress to support our bold new plan to help businesses raise up
to $15 billion in private sector capital, to bring jobs and opportunities
and inner cities, rural areas, with tax credits, loan guarantees, including
the new American Private Investment Companies, modeled on the Overseas
Private Investment Companies.

Now, for years and years we've had this OPIC, this Overseas Private
Investment Corporation, because we knew we had untapped markets overseas.
But our greatest untapped markets are not overseas--they are right here at
home. And we should go after them.

We must work hard to help bring prosperity back to the family farm.

As this Congress knows very well, dropping prices and the loss of foreign
markets have devastated too many family farmers. Last year, the Congress
provided substantial assistance to help stave off a disaster in American
agriculture, and I am ready to work with lawmakers of both parties to
create a farm safety net that will include crop insurance reform and farm
income assistance.

I ask you to join with me and do this. This should not be a political
issue. Everyone knows what an economic problem is going on out there in
rural America today, and we need an appropriate means to address it.

We must strengthen our lead in technology. It was government investment
that led to the creation of the Internet. I propose a 28-percent increase
in long-term computing research.

We also must be ready for the 21st century from its very first moment by
solving the so-called Y2K computer problem. We had one member of Congress
stand up and applaud. And we may have about that ration out there
applauding at home in front of their television sets. But remember, this is
a big, big problem, and we've been working hard on it. Already we've made
sure that the Social Security checks will come on time.

But I want all the folks at home listening to this to know that we need
every state and local government, every business large and small to work
with us to make sure that this Y2K computer bug will be remembered as the
last headache of the 20th century, not the first crisis of the 21st.

For our own prosperity, we must support economic growth abroad. You know,
until recently a third of our economic growth came from exports. But over
the past year and a half, financial turmoil has put that growth at risk.
Today, much of the world is in recession, with Asia hit especially hard.
This is the most serious financial crisis in half a century.

To meet it, the U.S. and other nations have reduced interest rates and
strengthened the International Monetary Fund and while the turmoil is not
over, we have worked very hard with other nations to contain it.

At the same time, we will continue to work on the long-term project:
building a global financial system for the 21st century that promotes
prosperity and tames the cycle of boom and bust that has engulfed so much
of Asia. This June, I will meet with other world leaders to advance this
historic purpose and I ask all of you to support our endeavors. I also ask
you to support creating a freer and fairer trading system for 21st century
America.

You know, I'd like to say something really serious to everyone in this
chamber in both parties. I think trade has divided us and divided Americans
outside this chamber for too long. Somehow, we have to find a common ground
on which business and workers and environmentalists and farmers and
government can stand together. I believe these are the things we ought to
all agree on. So, let me try.

First, we ought to tear down barriers, open markets and expand trade, but
at the same time, we must ensure that ordinary citizens in all countries
actually benefit from trade; a trade that promotes the dignity of work and
the rights of workers and protects the environment.

We must insist that international trade organizations be open to public
scrutiny instead of mysterious, secret things subject to wild criticism.

When you come right down to it, now that the world economy is becoming more
and more integrated, we have to do in the world what we spent the better
part of this century doing here at home. We have got to put a human face on
the global economy.

Now, we must enforce our trade laws when imports unlawfully flood our
nation. I have already informed the government of Japan if that nation's
sudden surge of steel imports into our country is not reversed, America
will respond.

We must help all manufacturers hit hard by the present crisis with loan
guarantees, and other incentives to increase American exports by nearly $2
billion. I'd like to believe we can achieve a new consensus on trade based
on these principles. And I ask the Congress to join me again in this common
approach and to give the president the trade authority long used and now
overdue and necessary to advance our prosperity in the 21st century.

Tonight, I issue a call to the nations of the world to join the United
States in a new round of global trade negotiation to expand exports of
services, manufactures and farm products.

Tonight, I say, we will work with the International Labor Organization on a
new initiative to raise labor standards around the world. And this year, we
will lead the international community to conclude a treaty to ban abusive
child labor everywhere in the world.

If we do these things--invest in our people, our communities, our
technology--and lead in the global economy, then we will begin to meet our
historic responsibility to build a 21st century prosperity for America.

You know, no nation in history has had the opportunity and the
responsibility we now have to shape a world that is more peaceful, more
secure, more free.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership helped to bring peace in
Northern Ireland.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership has put Bosnia on the path
to peace. And with our NATO allies we are pressing the Serbian government
to stop its brutal repression in Kosovo--to bring those responsible to
justice and to give the people of Kosovo the self-government they deserve.

All Americans can be proud that our leadership renewed hope for lasting
peace in the Middle East. Some of you were with me last December as we
watched the Palestinian National Council completely renounce its call for
the destruction of Israel.

Now, I ask Congress to provide resources so that all parties can implement
the Wye Agreement, to protect Israel's security, to stimulate the
Palestinian economy, to support our friends in Jordan. We must not, we dare
not, let them down. I hope you will help me.

As we work for peace, we must also meet threats to our nation's security,
including increased danger from outlaw nations and terrorism.

We will defend our security wherever we are threatened, as we did this
summer when we struck at Osama bin Laden's network of terror. The bombing
of our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania reminds us again of the risks faced
every day by those who represent America to the world. So let's give them
the support they need, the safest possible workplaces, and the resources
they must have so America can continue to lead.

We must work to keep terrorists from disrupting computer networks. We must
work to prepare local communities for biological and chemical emergencies,
to support research into vaccines and treatments. We must increase our
efforts to restrain the spread of nuclear weapons and missiles, from Korea
to India and Pakistan. We must expand our work with Russia, Ukraine and
other former Soviet nations to safeguard nuclear materials and technology
so they never fall into the wrong hands. Our balanced budget will increase
funding for these critical efforts by almost two-thirds over the next five
years.

With Russia we must continue to reduce our nuclear arsenals. The START II
Treaty and the framework we have already agreed to for START III could cut
them by 80 percent from their Cold War height.

It's been two years since I signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. If we
don't do the right thing, other nations won't either. I ask the Senate to
take this vital step, approve the treaty now to make it harder for other
nations to develop nuclear arms, and to make sure we can end nuclear
testing for ever.

For nearly a decade, Iraq has defied its obligations to destroy its weapons
of terror and the missiles to deliver them.

America will continue to contain (Iraqi President) Saddam (Hussein) and we
will work for the day when Iraq has a government worthy of its people. Now,
last month, in our action over Iraq, our troops were superb. Their mission
was so flawlessly executed, that we risk taking for granted the bravery and
skill it required. Captain Jeff Taliaferro, a 10-year Air Force veteran of
the Air Force, flew a B-1B bomber over Iraq as we attacked Saddam's war
machine. He is here with us tonight. I would like to ask you to honor him
and all the 33,000 men and women of Operation Desert Fox.

It is time to reverse the decline in defense spending that began in 1985.

Since April, together we have added nearly $6 billion to maintain our
military readiness. My balanced budget calls for a sustained increase over
the next six years for readiness, for modernization, and for pay and
benefits for our troops and their families.

You know, we are the heirs of a legacy of bravery represented in every
community in America by millions of our veterans. America's defenders today
still stand ready at a moments notice to go where comforts are few and
dangers are many, to do what needs to be done as no one else can. They
always come through for America. We must come through for them.

The new century demands new partnerships for peace and security. The United
Nations plays a crucial role, with allies sharing burdens America might
otherwise bear alone. America needs a strong and effective U.N. I want to
work with this new Congress to pay our dues and our debts.

We must continue to support security and stability in Europe and Asia--
expanding NATO and defining its new missions, maintaining our alliance with
Japan, with Korea, with our other Asian allies, and engaging China.

In China last year, I said to the leaders and the people what I'd like to
say again tonight: Stability can no longer be bought at the expense of
liberty.

But I'd also like to say again to the American people, it's important not
to isolate China. The more we bring China into the world, the more the
world will bring change and freedom to China.

Last spring, with some of you, I traveled to Africa, where I saw democracy
and reform rising, but still held back by violence and disease. We must
fortify African democracy and peace by launching radio democracy for
Africa, supporting the transition to democracy now beginning to take place
in Nigeria, and passing the African Trade and Development Act.

We must continue to deepen our ties to the Americas and the Caribbean, our
common work to educate children, fight drugs, strengthen democracy and
increase trade. In this hemisphere, every government but one is freely
chosen by its people. We are determined that Cuba, too, will know the
blessings of liberty.

The American people have opened their arms and their hearts and their arms
to our Central American and Caribbean neighbors who have been so devastated
by the recent hurricanes. Working with Congress, I am committed to help
them rebuild.

When the first lady and Tipper Gore visited the region, they saw thousands
of our troops and thousands of American volunteers. In the Dominican
Republic, Hillary helped to rededicate a hospital that had been rebuilt by
Dominicans and Americans working side by side. With her was some one else
who has been very important to the relief efforts. You know sports records
are made and sooner or later, they're broken. But making other people's
lives better and showing our children the true meaning of brotherhood, that
lasts forever. So for far more than baseball, Sammy Sosa, you're a hero in
two countries tonight. Thank you.

So I say to all of you, if we do these things, if we pursue peace, fight
terrorism, increase our strength, renew our alliances, we will begin to
meet our generation's historic responsibility to build a stronger 21st
century America in a freer, more peaceful world.

As the world has changed, so have our own communities. We must make the
safer, more livable, and more united. This year, we will reach our goal of
100,000 community police officers ahead of schedule and under budget.

The Brady Bill has stopped a quarter million felons, fugitives, and
stalkers from buying handguns and now, the murder rate is the lowest in 30
years, and the crime rate has dropped for six straight years.

Tonight, I propose a 21st Century Crime Bill to deploy the latest
technologies and tactics to make our communities even safer. Our balanced
budget will help put up to 50,000 more police on the street in the areas
hardest hit by crime, and then to equip them with new tools from
crime-mapping computers to digital mug shots. We must break the deadly
cycle of drugs and crime.

Our budget expands support for drug testing and treatment, saying to
prisoners, "If you stay on drugs, you have to stay behind bars." And to
those on parole, "If you want to keep your freedom, you must stay free of
drugs."

I ask Congress to restore the five-day waiting period for buying a handgun
and extend the Brady Bill to prevent juveniles who commit violent crimes
from buying a gun.

We must do more to keep our schools the safest places in our communities.
Last year, every American was horrified and heartbroken by the tragic
killings in Jonesboro, Paducah, Pearl, Edinboro, Springfield. We were
deeply moved by the courageous parents now working to keep guns out of the
hands of children and to make other efforts so that other parents don't
have to live through their loss.

After she lost her daughter, Suzann Wilson of Jonesboro, Arkansas, came
here to the White House with a powerful plea. She said "Please, please for
the sake of your children, lock up your guns. Don't let what happened in
Jonesboro, happen in your town."

It's a message she is passionately advocating every day. Suzann is here
with us tonight, with the first lady. I would like to thank her for her
courage and her commitment.

In memory of all the children who lost their lives to school violence, I
ask you to strengthen the Safe And Drug Free School Act, to pass
legislation to require child trigger locks, to do everything possible to
keep our children safe.

Today, we're--excuse me--a century ago, President Theodore Roosevelt
defined our great central task as leaving this land even a better land for
our descendants than it is for us. Today, we're restoring the Florida
Everglades, saving Yellowstone, preserving the red rock canyons of Utah,
protecting California's redwoods, and our precious coasts.

But our most fateful new challenge is the threat of global warming.
Nineteen ninety-eight was the warmest year ever recorded. Last year's heat
waves, floods and storm are but a hint of what future generations may
endure if we do not act now.

Tonight, I propose a new clean air fund to help communities reduce
greenhouse and other pollutions, and tax incentives and investment to spur
clean energy technologies. And I want to work with members of Congress in
both parties to reward companies that take early, voluntary action to
reduce greenhouse gases.

Now, all our communities face a preservation challenge as they grow, and
green space shrinks. Seven thousand acres of farmland and open space are
lost every day. In response, I propose two major initiatives. First, a $1
billion livability agenda to help communities save open space, ease traffic
congestion, and grow in ways that enhance every citizen's quality of life.
And second, a $1 billion lands legacy initiative to preserve places of
natural beauty all across America, from the most remote wilderness to the
nearest city park.

These are truly landmark initiatives, which could not have been developed
without the visionary leadership of the vice president and I want to thank
him very much for his commitment here. Thank you.

Now, to get the most out of your community, you have to give something
back. That's why we created AmeriCorps, our national service program that
gives today's generation a chance to serve their communities and earn money
for college.

So far, in just four years, 100,000 young Americans have built low-income
homes with Habitat for Humanity, helped tutor children with churches, work
with FEMA to ease the burden of natural disasters and performed countless
other acts of service that has made America better. I ask Congress to give
more young Americans the chance to follow their lead and serve America in
AmeriCorps.

Now, we must work to renew our national community as well for the 21st
century. Last year, the House passed the bipartisan campaign finance reform
legislation sponsored by Representatives (Christopher) Shays (R-Conn.) and
(Martin T.) Meehan (D-Mass.) and Sens. (John) McCain (R-Ariz.) and
(Russell) Feingold (D-Wis.). But a partisan minority in the Senate blocked
reform. So I would like to say to the House, pass it again--quickly.

And I'd like to say to the Senate, I hope you will say yes to a stronger
American democracy in the year 2000.

Since 1997, our Initiative on Race has sought to bridge the divides between
and among our people. In its report last fall, the Initiatives Advisory
Board found that Americans really do want to bring our people together
across racial lines.

We know it's been a long journey. For some it goes back to before the
beginning of our republic. For others, back since the Civil War; for
others, throughout the 21st century. But for most of us alive today, in a
very real sense this journey began 43 years ago, when a woman named Rosa
Parks sat down on a bus in Alabama and wouldn't get up.

She's sitting down with the first lady tonight, and she may get up or not
as she chooses.

We know that our continuing racial problems are aggravated, as the
presidential initiative said, by opportunity gaps.

The initiative I've outlined tonight will help to close them. But we know
that the discrimination gap has not been fully closed either.
Discrimination or violence because of race or religion, ancestry or gender,
disability or sexual orientation, is wrong and it ought to be illegal.
Therefore, I ask Congress to make the Employment Non-Discrimination Act and
the Hate Crimes Prevention Act the law of the land.

You know, now since every person in America counts, every American ought to
be counted. We need a census that uses modern scientific methods to do
that.

Our new immigrants must be part of our one America. After all, they're
revitalizing our cities, they're energizing our culture, they're building
up our economy. We have a responsibility to make them welcome here, and
they have a responsibility to enter the mainstream of American life.

That means learning English and learning about our democratic system of
government. There are now long waiting lines of immigrants that are trying
to do just that.

Therefore, our budget significantly expands our efforts to help them meet
their responsibility. I hope you will support it.

Whether our ancestors came here on the Mayflower, on slave ships; whether
they came to Ellis Island or LAX in Los Angeles; whether they came
yesterday or walked this land 1,000 years ago, our great challenge for the
21st century is to find a way to be one America. We can meet all the other
challenges if we can go forward as one America.

You know, barely more than 300 days from now we will cross that bridge into
the new millennium. This is a moment, as the first lady has said, to honor
the past and imagine the future.

I'd like to take just a minute to honor her, for leading our Millennium
Project, for all she's done for our children. For all she has done in her
historic role to serve our nation and our best ideals at home and abroad, I
honor her.

Last year--last year I called on Congress and every citizen to mark the
millennium by saving America's treasures. Hillary's traveled all across the
country to inspire recognition and support for saving places like Thomas
Edison's invention factory or Harriet Tubman's home.

Now we have to preserve our treasures in every community. And tonight,
before I close, I want to invite every town, every city, every community to
become a nationally recognized millennium community by launching projects
that save our history, promote our arts and humanities, prepare our
children for the 21st century.

Already the response has been remarkable. And I want to say a special word
of thanks to our private sector partners and to members in Congress of both
parties for their support. Just one example. Because of you, the Star
Spangled Banner will be preserved for the ages.

In ways large and small, as we look to the millennium, we are keeping alive
what George Washington called the "sacred fire of liberty."

Six years ago, I came to office in a time of doubt for America, with our
economy troubled, our deficit high, our people divided. Some even wondered
whether our best days were behind us. But across this nation, in a thousand
neighborhoods, I have seen, even amidst the pain and uncertainty of
recession, the real heart and character of America.

I knew then we Americans could renew this country.

Tonight, as I deliver the last State of the Union Address for the 20th
century, no one anywhere in the world can doubt the enduring resolve and
boundless capacity of the American people to work toward that "more perfect
union" of our founders' dreams.

We are now, at the end of a century, when generation after generation of
Americans answered the call to greatness, overcoming Depression, lifting up
the dispossessed, bringing down barriers to racial prejudice, building the
largest middle class in history, winning two world wars and the "long
twilight struggle" of the Cold War.

We must all be profoundly grateful for the magnificent achievements of our
forbearers in this century.

Yet perhaps in the daily press of events, in the clash of controversy, we
don't see our own time for what it truly is--a new dawn for America.

A hundred years from tonight, another American president will stand in this
place and report on the State of the Union. He--or she--will look back on
the 21st century shaped in so many ways by the decisions we make here and
now.

So let it be said of us then that we were thinking not only of our time,
but of their time; that we reached as high as our ideals; that we put aside
our divisions and found a new hour of healing and hopefulness; that we
joined together to serve and strengthen the land we love.

My fellow Americans, this is our moment. Let us lift our eyes as one
nation, and from the mountaintop of this American century, look ahead to
the next one--asking God's blessing on our endeavors and on our beloved
country.

Thank you, and good evening.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, honored guests, my
fellow Americans:

We are fortunate to be alive at this moment in history. Never before has
our nation enjoyed, at once, so much prosperity and social progress with so
little internal crisis or so few external threats. Never before have we had
such a blessed opportunity--and, therefore, such a profound obligation--
to build the more perfect union of our founders' dreams.

We begin the new century with over 20 million new jobs. The fastest
economic growth in more than 30 years; the lowest unemployment rates in 30
years; the lowest poverty rates in 20 years; the lowest African-American
and Hispanic unemployment rates on record; the first back-to-back budget
surpluses in 42 years.

Next month, America will achieve the longest period of economic growth in
our entire history.

We have built a new economy.

Our economic revolution has been matched by a revival of the American
spirit: Crime down by 20 percent, to its lowest level in 25 years. Teen
births down seven years in a row and adoptions up by 30 percent. Welfare
rolls cut in half to their lowest levels in 30 years.

My fellow Americans, the state of our union is the strongest it has ever
been.

As always, the credit belongs to the American people.

My gratitude also goes to those of you in this chamber who have worked with
us to put progress above partisanship.

Eight years ago, it was not so clear to most Americans there would be much
to celebrate in the year 2000. Then our nation was gripped by economic
distress, social decline, political gridlock. The title of a best-selling
book asked: "America: What went wrong?"

In the best traditions of our nation, Americans determined to set things
right. We restored the vital center, replacing outdated ideologies with a
new vision anchored in basic, enduring values: opportunity for all,
responsibility from all, and a community of all Americans.

We reinvented government, transforming it into a catalyst for new ideas
that stress both opportunity and responsibility, and give our people the
tools to solve their own problems.

With the smallest federal workforce in 40 years, we turned record deficits
into record surpluses, and doubled our investment in education. We cut
crime: with 100,000 community police and the Brady Law, which has kept guns
out of the hands of half a million criminals.

We ended welfare as we knew it--requiring work while protecting health
care and nutrition for children, and investing more in child care,
transportation, and housing to help their parents go to work. We have
helped parents to succeed at work and at home--with family leave, which 20
million Americans have used to care for a newborn child or a sick loved
one. We have engaged 150,000 young Americans in citizen service through
AmeriCorps--while also helping them earn their way through college.

In 1992, we had a roadmap. Today, we have results. More important, America
again has the confidence to dream big dreams. But we must not let our
renewed confidence grow into complacency. We will be judged by the dreams
and deeds we pass on to our children. And on that score, we will be held to
a high standard, indeed. Because our chance to do good is so great.

My fellow Americans, we have crossed the bridge we built to the 21st
Century. Now, we must shape a 21st-Century American revolution--of
opportunity, responsibility, and community. We must be, as we were in the
beginning, a new nation.

At the dawn of the last century, Theodore Roosevelt said, "the one
characteristic more essential than any other is foresight. . . It should be
the growing nation with a future which takes the long look ahead."

Tonight let us take our look long ahead--and set great goals for our
nation.

To 21st Century America, let us pledge that:

Every child will begin school ready to learn and graduate ready to succeed.
Every family will be able to succeed at home and at work--and no child
will be raised in poverty. We will meet the challenge of the aging of
America. We will assure quality, affordable healthcare for all Americans.
We will make America the safest big country on earth. We will bring
prosperity to every American community. We will reverse the course of
climate change and leave a cleaner, safer planet. America will lead the
world toward shared peace and prosperity, and the far frontiers of science
and technology. And we will become at last what our founders pledged us to
be so long ago--one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and
justice for all.

These are great goals, worthy of a great nation. We will not reach them all
this year. Not even in this decade. But we will reach them. Let us remember
that the first American revolution was not won with a single shot. The
continent was not settled in a single year. The lesson of our history--and
the lesson of the last seven years--is that great goals are reached step
by step: always building on our progress, always gaining ground.

Of course, you can't gain ground if you're standing still. For too long
this Congress has been standing still on some of our most pressing national
priorities. Let's begin with them.

I ask you again to pass a real patient's bill of rights. Pass common-sense
gun-safety legislation. Pass campaign finance reform. Vote on long overdue
judicial nominations and other important appointees. And, again, I ask you
to raise the minimum wage.

Two years ago, as we reached our first balanced budget, I asked that we
meet our responsibility to the next generation by maintaining our fiscal
discipline. Because we refused to stray from that path, we are doing
something that would have seemed unimaginable seven years ago: We are
actually paying down the national debt. If we stay on this path, we can pay
down the debt entirely in 13 years and make America debt-free for the first
time since Andrew Jackson was president in 1835.

In 1993, we began to put our fiscal house in order with the Deficit
Reduction Act, winning passage in both houses by just one vote. Your former
colleague, my first Secretary of the Treasury, led that effort. He is here
tonight. Lloyd Bentsen, you have served America well.

Beyond paying off the debt, we must ensure that the benefits of debt
reduction go to preserving two of the most important guarantees we make to
every American--Social Security and Medicare. I ask you tonight to work
with me to make a bipartisan down payment on Social Security reform by
crediting the interest savings from debt reduction to the Social Security
Trust Fund to ensure that it is strong and sound for the next 50 years.

But this is just the start of our journey. Now we must take the right steps
toward reaching our great goals.

Opportunity and Responsibility in Education

First and foremost, we need a 21st Century revolution in education, guided
by our faith that every child can learn. Because education is more than
ever the key to our children's future, we must make sure all our children
have that key. That means quality preschool and afterschool, the best
trained teachers in every classroom, and college opportunities for all our
children.

For seven years, we have worked hard to improve our schools, with
opportunity and responsibility: Investing more, but demanding more in
return.

Reading, math, and college entrance scores are up. And some of the most
impressive gains are in schools in poor neighborhoods.

All successful schools have followed the same proven formula: higher
standards, more accountability, so all children can reach those standards.
I have sent Congress a reform plan based on that formula. It holds states
and school districts accountable for progress, and rewards them for
results. Each year, the national government invests more than $15 billion
in our schools. It's time to support what works and stop supporting what
doesn't.

As we demand more than ever from our schools, we should invest more than
ever in our schools.

Let's double our investment to help states and districts turn around their
worst-performing schools--or shut them down.

Let's double our investment in afterschool and summer school programs--
boosting achievement, and keeping children off the street and out of
trouble. If we do, we can give every child in every failing school in
America the chance to meet high standards.

Since 1993, we've nearly doubled our investment in Head Start and improved
its quality. Tonight, I ask for another $1 billion to Head Start, the
largest increase in the program's history.

We know that children learn best in smaller classes with good teachers. For
two years in a row, Congress has supported my plan to hire 100,000 new,
qualified teachers, to lower class sizes in the early grades. This year, I
ask you to make it three in a row.

And to make sure all teachers know the subjects they teach, tonight I
propose a new teacher quality initiative--to recruit more talented people
into the classroom, reward good teachers for staying there, and give all
teachers the training they need.

We know charter schools provide real public school choice. When I became
President, there was just one independent public charter school in all
America. Today there are 1,700. I ask you to help us meet our goal of 3,000
by next year.

We know we must connect all our classrooms to the Internet. We're getting
there. In 1994, only three percent of our classrooms were connected. Today,
with the help of the Vice President's E-rate program, more than half of
them are; and 90 percent of our schools have at least one connection to the
Internet.

But we can't finish the job when a third of all schools are in serious
disrepair, many with walls and wires too old for the Internet. Tonight, I
propose to help 5,000 schools a year make immediate, urgent repairs. And
again, to help build or modernize 6,000 schools, to get students out of
trailers and into high-tech classrooms.

We should double our bipartisan GEAR UP program to mentor 1.4 million
disadvantaged young people for college. And let's offer these students a
chance to take the same college test-prep courses wealthier students use to
boost their test scores.

To make the American Dream achievable for all, we must make college
affordable for all. For seven years, on a bipartisan basis, we have taken
action toward that goal: larger Pell grants, more-affordable student loans,
education IRAs, and our HOPE scholarships, which have already benefited 5
million young people. 67 percent of high school graduates now go on to
college, up almost 10 percent since 1993. Yet millions of families still
strain to pay college tuition. They need help.

I propose a landmark $30-billion college opportunity tax cut--a
middle-class tax deduction for up to $10,000 in college tuition costs.
We've already made two years of college affordable for all. Now let's make
four years of college affordable for all.

If we take all these steps, we will move a long way toward making sure
every child starts school ready to learn and graduates ready to succeed.

Rewarding Work and Strengthening Families

We need a 21st Century revolution to reward work and strengthen families--
by giving every parent the tools to succeed at work and at the most
important work of all--raising their children. That means making sure that
every family has health care and the support to care for aging parents, the
tools to bring their children up right, and that no child grows up in
poverty.

From my first days as President, we have worked to give families better
access to better health care. In 1997, we passed the Children's Health
Insurance Program--CHIP--so that workers who don't have health care
coverage through their employers at least can get it for their children. So
far, we've enrolled 2 million children, and we're well on our way to our
goal of 5 million.

But there are still more than 40 million Americans without health
insurance, more than there were in 1993. Tonight I propose that we follow
Vice President Gore's suggestion to make low income parents eligible for
the insurance that covers their kids. Together with our children's
initiative, we can cover nearly one quarter of the uninsured in America.

Again, I ask you to let people between 55 and 65--the fastest growing
group of uninsured--buy into Medicare. And let's give them a tax credit to
make that choice an affordable one.

When the Baby Boomers retire, Medicare will be faced with caring for twice
as many of our citizens--and yet it is far from ready to do so. My
generation must not ask our children's generation to shoulder our burden.
We must strengthen and modernize Medicare now.

My budget includes a comprehensive plan to reform Medicare, to make it more
efficient and competitive. And it dedicates nearly $400 billion of our
budget surplus to keep Medicare solvent past 2025; and, at long last, to
give every senior a voluntary choice of affordable coverage for
prescription drugs.

Lifesaving drugs are an indispensable part of modern medicine. No one
creating a Medicare program today would even consider excluding coverage
for prescription drugs. Yet more than three in five seniors now lack
dependable drug coverage which can lengthen and enrich their lives.
Millions of older Americans who need prescription drugs the most pay the
highest prices for them.

In good conscience, we cannot let another year pass without extending to
all seniors the lifeline of affordable prescription drugs.

Record numbers of Americans are providing for aging or ailing loved ones at
home. Last year, I proposed a $1,000 tax credit for long-term care.
Frankly, that wasn't enough. This year, let's triple it to $3,000--and
this year, let's pass it.

And we must make needed investments to expand access to mental health care.
I want to thank the person who has led our efforts to break down the
barriers to the decent treatment of mental illness: Tipper Gore.

Taken together, these proposals would mark the largest investment in health
care in the 35 years since the creation of Medicare--a big step toward
assuring health care for all Americans, young and old.

We must also make investments that reward work and support families.
Nothing does that better than the Earned Income Tax Credit, the EITC. The
"E" in "EITC" is about earning; working; taking responsibility and being
rewarded for it. In my first Address to you, I asked Congress to greatly
expand this tax credit; and you did. As a result, in 1998 alone, the EITC
helped more than 4.3 million Americans work their way out of poverty and
toward the middle class--double the number in 1993.

Tonight, I propose another major expansion. We should reduce the marriage
penalty for the EITC, making sure it rewards marriage just as it rewards
work. And we should expand the tax credit for families with more than two
children to provide up to $1,100 more in tax relief.

We can't reward work and family unless men and women get equal pay for
equal work. The female unemployment rate is the lowest in 46 years. Yet
women still earn only about 75 cents for every dollar men earn. We must do
better by providing the resources to enforce present equal pay laws,
training more women for high-paying, high-tech jobs, and passing the
Paycheck Fairness Act.

Two-thirds of new jobs are in the suburbs, far away from many low-income
families. In the past two years, I have proposed and Congress has approved
110,000 new housing vouchers--rent subsidies to help working families live
closer to the workplace. This year, let us more than double that number. If
we want people to go to work, they have to be able to get to work.

Many working parents spend up to a quarter of their income on child care.
Last year, we helped parents provide child care for about two million
children. My child care initiative, along with funds already secured in
welfare reform, would make child care better, safer, and more affordable
for another 400,000 children.

For hard-pressed middle-income families, we should also expand the child
care tax credit. And we should take the next big step. We should make that
tax credit refundable for low-income families. For those making under
$30,000 a year, that could mean up to $2,400 for child-care costs. We all
say we're pro-work and pro-family. Passing this proposal would prove it.

Tens of millions of Americans live from paycheck to paycheck. As hard as
they work, they still don't have the opportunity to save. Too few can make
use of IRAs and 401-K retirement plans. We should do more to help working
families save and accumulate wealth. That's the idea behind so-called
Individual Development Accounts. Let's take that idea to a new level, with
Retirement Savings Accounts that enable every low- and moderate-income
family in America to save for retirement, a first home, a medical
emergency, or a college education. I propose to match their contributions,
however small, dollar for dollar, every year they save. And to give a major
new tax credit for any small business that provides a meaningful pension to
its workers.

Nearly one in three American children grows up in a home without a father.
These children are five times more likely to live in poverty than children
with both parents at home. Clearly, demanding and supporting responsible
fatherhood is critical to lifting all children out of poverty.

We have doubled child support collections since 1992, and I am proposing
tough new measures to hold still more fathers responsible. But we should
recognize that a lot of fathers want to do right by their children--and
need help to do it. Carlos Rosas of St. Paul, Minnesota, got that help. Now
he has a good job and he supports his son Ricardo. My budget will help
40,000 fathers make the choices Carlos did. And I thank him for being
here.

If there is any issue on which we can reach across party lines it is in our
common commitment to reward work and strengthen families. Thanks to
overwhelming bipartisan support from this Congress, we have improved foster
care, supported those who leave it when they turn eighteen, and
dramatically increased the number of foster children going to adoptive
homes. I thank you for that. Of course, I am especially grateful to the
person who has led our efforts from the beginning, and who has worked
tirelessly for children and families for thirty years now: my wife,
Hillary.

If we take all these steps, we will move a long way toward empowering
parents to succeed at home and at work and ensuring that no child is raised
in poverty. We can make these vital investments in health care, education
and support for working families--and still offer tax cuts to help pay for
college, for retirement, to care for aging parents and reduce the marriage
penalty--without forsaking the path of fiscal discipline that got us here.
Indeed, we must make these investments and tax cuts in the context of a
balanced budget that strengthens and extends the life of Social Security
and Medicare and pays down the national debt.

Responsibility and Crime

Crime in America has dropped for the past seven years--the longest decline
on record, thanks to a national consensus we helped to forge on community
police, sensible gun safety laws, and effective prevention. But nobody
believes America is safe enough. So let's set a higher goal: let's make
America the safest big country in the world.

Last fall, Congress supported my plan to hire--in addition to the 100,000
community police we have already funded--50,000 more, concentrated in
high-crime neighborhoods. I ask your continued support.

Soon after the Columbine tragedy, Congress considered common-sense gun
safety legislation to require Brady background checks at gun shows, child
safety locks for all new handguns, and a ban on the importation of
large-capacity ammunition clips. With courage--and a tie-breaking vote by
the Vice President--the Senate faced down the gun lobby, stood up for the
American people, and passed this legislation. But the House failed to
follow suit.

We've all seen what happens when guns fall into the wrong hands. Daniel
Mauser was only 15 years old when he was gunned down at Columbine. He was
an amazing kid, a straight-A student, a good skier. Like all parents who
lose their children, his father Tom has borne unimaginable grief. Somehow
Tom has found the strength to honor his son by transforming his grief into
action. Earlier this month, he took a leave of absence from his job to
fight for tougher gun safety laws. I pray that his courage and wisdom will
move this Congress to make common-sense gun safety legislation the very
next order of business. Tom, thank you for being here tonight.

We must strengthen gun laws and better enforce laws already on the books.
Federal gun crime prosecutions are up 16 percent since I took office. But
again, we must do more. I propose to hire more federal and local gun
prosecutors, and more ATF agents to crack down on illegal gun traffickers
and bad-apple dealers. And we must give law enforcement the tools to trace
every gun--and every bullet--used in a crime in America.

Listen to this: the accidental gun death rate of children under 15 in the
United States is nine times higher than in the other 25 industrialized
nations--combined. Technologies now exist that could lead to guns that can
only be fired by the adults who own them. I ask Congress to fund research
in Smart Gun technology. I also call on responsible leaders in the gun
industry to work with us on smart guns and other steps to keep guns out of
the wrong hands and keep our children safe.

Every parent I know worries about the impact of violence in the media on
their children. I thank the entertainment industry for accepting my
challenge to put voluntary ratings on TV programs and video and Internet
games. But the ratings are too numerous, diverse, and confusing to be
really useful to parents. Therefore, I now ask the industry to accept the
First Lady's challenge--to develop a single, voluntary rating system for
all children's entertainment, one that is easier for parents to understand
and enforce.

If we take all these steps, we will be well on our way to making America
the safest big country in the world.

Opening New Markets

To keep our historic economic expansion going, we need a 21st Century
revolution to open new markets, start new businesses, and hire new workers
right here in America--in our inner cities, poor rural areas, and on
Indian reservations.

Our nation's prosperity has not yet reached these places. Over the last six
months, I have traveled to many of them--joined by many of you, and many
far-sighted business people--to shine a spotlight on the enormous
potential in communities from Appalachia to the Mississippi Delta, from
Watts to the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Everywhere I've gone, I've met
talented people eager for opportunity, and able to work. Let's put them to
work.

For business, it's the smart thing to do. For America, it's the right thing
to do. And if we don't do it now, when will we ever get around to it?

I ask Congress to give businesses the same incentives to invest in
America's new markets that they now have to invest in foreign markets.
Tonight, I propose a large New Markets Tax Credit and other incentives to
spur $22 billion in private-sector capital--to create new businesses and
new investments in inner cities and rural areas.

Empowerment Zones have been creating these opportunities for five years
now. We should also increase incentives to invest in them and create more
of them.

This is not a Democratic or a Republican issue. It is an American issue.
Mr. Speaker, it was a powerful moment last November when you joined me and
the Reverend Jesse Jackson in your home state of Illinois, and committed to
working toward our common goal, by combining the best ideas from both sides
of the aisle. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with you.

We must maintain our commitment to community development banks and keep the
community reinvestment act strong so all Americans have access to the
capital they need to buy homes and build businesses.

We need to make special efforts to address the areas with the highest rates
of poverty. My budget includes a special $110 million initiative to promote
economic development in the Mississippi Delta; and $1 billion to increase
economic opportunity, health care, education and law enforcement for Native
American communities. In this new century, we should honor our historic
responsibility to empower the first Americans. I thank leaders and members
from both parties who have already expressed an interest in working with us
on these efforts.

There's another part of our American community in trouble today--our
family farmers. When I signed the Farm Bill in 1996, I said there was a
great danger it would work well in good times but not in bad. Well,
droughts, floods, and historically low prices have made times very bad for
our farmers. We must work together to strengthen the farm safety net,
invest in land conservation, and create new markets by expanding our
program for bio-based fuels and products.

Today, opportunity for all requires something new: having access to a
computer and knowing how to use it. That means we must close the digital
divide between those who have these tools and those who don't.

Connecting classrooms and libraries to the Internet is crucial, but it's
just a start. My budget ensures that all new teachers are trained to teach
21st Century skills and creates technology centers in 1,000 communities to
serve adults. This spring, I will invite high-tech leaders to join me on
another New Markets tour--to close the digital divide and open opportunity
for all our people. I thank the high-tech companies that are already doing
so much in this area--and I hope the new tax incentives I have proposed
will encourage others to join us.

If we take these steps, we will go a long way toward our goal of bringing
opportunity to every community.

Global Change and American Leadership

To realize the full possibilities of the new economy, we must reach beyond
our own borders, to shape the revolution that is tearing down barriers and
building new networks among nations and individuals, economies and
cultures: globalization.

It is the central reality of our time. Change this profound is both
liberating and threatening. But there is no turning back. And our open,
creative society stands to benefit more than any other--if we understand,
and act on, the new realities of interdependence. We must be at the center
of every vital global network, as a good neighbor and partner. We cannot
build our future without helping others to build theirs.

First, we must forge a new consensus on trade. Those of us who believe
passionately in the power of open trade must ensure that it lifts both our
living standards and our values, never tolerating abusive child labor or a
race to the bottom on the environment and worker protection. Still, open
markets and rules-based trade are the best engines we know for raising
living standards, reducing global poverty and environmental destruction,
and assuring the free flow of ideas. There is only one direction for
America on trade: we must go forward.

And we must make developing economies our partners in prosperity--which is
why I ask Congress to finalize our groundbreaking African and Caribbean
Basin trade initiatives.

Globalization is about more than economics. Our purpose must be to bring
the world together around democracy, freedom, and peace, and to oppose
those who would tear it apart.

Here are the fundamental challenges I believe America must meet to shape
the 21st Century world.

First, we must continue to encourage our former adversaries, Russia and
China, to emerge as stable, prosperous, democratic nations. Both are being
held back from reaching their full potential: Russia by the legacy of
communism, economic turmoil, a cruel and self-defeating war in Chechnya;
China by the illusion that it can buy stability at the expense of freedom.
But think how much has changed in the past decade: thousands of former
Soviet nuclear weapons eliminated; Russian soldiers serving with ours in
the Balkans; Russian people electing their leaders for the first time in a
thousand years. And in China, an economy more open to the world than ever
before. No one can know for sure what direction these great countries will
choose. But we must do everything in our power to increase the chance they
will choose wisely, to be constructive members of the global community.

That is why we must support those Russians struggling for a democratic,
prosperous future; continue to reduce both our nuclear arsenals; and help
Russia safeguard weapons and materials that remain.

That is why Congress should support the agreement we negotiated to bring
China into the WTO, by passing Permanent Normal Trade Relations as soon as
possible this year. Our markets are already open to China. This agreement
will open China's markets to us. And it will advance the cause of peace in
Asia and promote the cause of change in China.

A second challenge is to protect our security from conflicts that pose the
risk of wider war and threaten our common humanity. America cannot prevent
every conflict or stop every outrage. But where our interests are at stake
and we can make a difference, we must be peacemakers.

We should be proud of America's role in bringing the Middle East closer
than ever to a comprehensive peace; building peace in Northern Ireland;
working for peace in East Timor and Africa; promoting reconciliation
between Greece and Turkey and in Cyprus; working to defuse crises between
India and Pakistan; defending human rights and religious freedom.

And we should be proud of the men and women of our armed forces and those
of our allies who stopped the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo--enabling a
million innocent people to return to their homes.

When Slobodan Milosevic unleashed his terror on Kosovo, Captain John
Cherrey was one of the brave airmen who turned the tide. And when another
American plane went down over Serbia, he flew into the teeth of enemy air
defenses to bring his fellow pilot home. Thanks to our armed forces' skill
and bravery, we prevailed without losing a single American in combat.
Captain Cherrey, we honor you, and promise to finish the job you began.

A third challenge is to keep the inexorable march of technology from giving
terrorists and potentially hostile nations the means to undermine our
defenses. The same advances that have shrunk cell phones to fit in the
palms of our hands can also make weapons of terror easier to conceal and
easier to use.

We must meet this threat: by making effective agreements to restrain
nuclear and missile programs in North Korea, curbing the flow of lethal
technology to Iran; preventing Iraq from threatening its neighbors;
increasing our preparedness against chemical and biological attack;
protecting our vital computer systems from hackers and criminals; and
developing a system to defend against new missile threats--while working
to preserve our Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Russia.

I hope we can have a constructive bipartisan dialogue this year to build a
consensus which will lead eventually to the ratification of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

A fourth challenge is to ensure that the stability of our planet is not
threatened by the huge gulf between rich and poor. We cannot accept a world
in which part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new economy, while
the rest live on the bare edge of survival. We must do our part, with
expanded trade, expanded aid, and the expansion of freedom.

From Nigeria to Indonesia, more people won the right to choose their
leaders in 1999 than in 1989, the year the Berlin Wall fell. We must stand
by democracies--like Colombia, fighting narco-traffickers for its people's
lives, and our children's lives. I have proposed a strong two-year package
to help Colombia win this fight; and I ask for your support. And I will
propose tough new legislation to go after what drug barons value most--
their money.

In a world where 1.2 billion people live on less than a dollar a day, we
must do our part in the global endeavor to reduce the debts of the poorest
countries so they can invest in education, health and economic growth--as
the Pope and other religious leaders have urged. Last year, Congress made a
down payment on America's share. And I ask for your continued support.

And America must help more nations break the bonds of disease. Last year in
Africa, AIDS killed ten times as many people as war did. My budget invests
$150 million more in the fight against this and other infectious killers.
Today, I propose a tax credit to speed the development of vaccines for
diseases like malaria, TB and AIDS. I ask the private sector and our
partners around the world to join us in embracing this cause. Together, we
can save millions of lives.

Our final challenge is the most important: to pass a national security
budget that keeps our military the best trained and best equipped in the
world, with heightened readiness and 21st Century weapons; raises salaries
for our service men and women; protects our veterans; fully funds the
diplomacy that keeps our soldiers out of war; and makes good on our
commitment to pay our UN dues and arrears. I ask you to pass this budget
and I thank you for the extraordinary support you have given--Republicans
and Democrats alike--to our men and women in uniform. I especially want to
thank Secretary Cohen for symbolizing our bipartisan commitment to our
national security--and Janet Cohen, I thank you for tirelessly traveling
the world to show our support for the troops.

If we meet all these challenges, America can lead the world toward peace
and freedom in an era of globalization.

Responsibility, Opportunity, and the Environment

I am grateful for the opportunities the Vice President and I have had to
work hard to protect the environment and finally to put to rest the notion
that you can't expand the economy while protecting the environment. As our
economy has grown, we have rid more than 500 neighborhoods of toxic waste
and ensured cleaner air and water for millions of families. In the past
three months alone, we have acted to preserve more than 40 million acres of
roadless lands in our National Forests and created three new National
Monuments.

But as our communities grow, our commitment to conservation must grow as
well. Tonight, I propose creating a permanent conservation fund to restore
wildlife, protect coastlines, and save natural treasures from California
redwoods to the Everglades. This Lands Legacy endowment represents by far
the most enduring investment in land preservation ever proposed.

Last year, the Vice President launched a new effort to help make
communities more livable--so children will grow up next to parks, not
parking lots, and parents can be home with their children instead of stuck
in traffic. Tonight, we propose new funding for advanced transit systems--
for saving precious open spaces--for helping major cities around the Great
Lakes protect their waterways and enhance their quality of life.

The greatest environmental challenge of the new century is global warming.
Scientists tell us that the 1990s were the hottest decade of the entire
millennium. If we fail to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, deadly heat
waves and droughts will become more frequent, coastal areas will be
flooded, economies disrupted.

Many people in the United States and around the world still believe we
can't cut greenhouse gas pollution without slowing economic growth. In the
Industrial Age that may have been true. In the digital economy, it isn't.
New technologies make it possible to cut harmful emissions and provide even
more growth. For example, just last week, automakers unveiled cars that get
70 to 80 miles a gallon--the fruits of a unique research partnership
between government and industry. Before you know it, efficient production
of biofuels will give us the equivalent of hundreds of miles from a gallon
of gas.

To speed innovations in environmental technologies, I propose giving major
tax incentives to businesses for the production of clean energy--and to
families for buying energy-saving homes and appliances and the next
generation of super-efficient cars when they hit the showroom floor. I also
call on the auto industry to use available technologies to make all new
cars more fuel efficient right away. And on Congress to make more of our
clean-energy technologies available to the developing world--creating
cleaner growth abroad and new jobs at home.

The Opportunity and Responsibility of Science and Technology

In the new century, innovations in science and technology will be the key
not only to the health of the environment but to miraculous improvements in
the quality of our lives and advances in the economy.

Later this year, researchers will complete the first draft of the entire
human genome--the very blueprint of life. It is important for all
Americans to recognize that your tax dollars have fueled this research--
and that this and other wise investments in science are leading to a
revolution in our ability to detect, treat, and prevent disease.

For example, researchers have identified genes that cause Parkinson's
Disease, diabetes, and certain types of cancer--and they are designing
precision therapies that will block the harmful effects of these faulty
genes for good. Researchers are already using this new technique to target
and destroy cells that cause breast cancer. Soon, we may be able to use it
to prevent the onset of Alzheimer's Disease. Scientists are also working on
an artificial retina to help many blind people to see and microchips that
would directly stimulate damaged spinal cords and allow people who are now
paralyzed to stand up and walk.

Science and engineering innovations are also propelling our remarkable
prosperity. Information technology alone now accounts for a third of our
economic growth, with jobs that pay almost 80 percent above the private
sector average. Again, we should keep in mind: government-funded research
brought supercomputers, the Internet, and communications satellites into
being. Soon researchers will bring us devices that can translate foreign
languages as fast as you can speak; materials 10 times stronger than steel
at a fraction of the weight; and molecular computers the size of a teardrop
with the power of today's fastest supercomputers.

To accelerate the march of discovery across all disciplines of science and
technology, my budget includes an unprecedented $3 billion increase in the
21st Century Research Fund, the largest increase in civilian research in a
generation.

These new breakthroughs must be used in ways that reflect our most
cherished values. First and foremost, we must safeguard our citizens'
privacy. Last year, we proposed rules to protect every citizen's medical
records. This year, we will finalize those rules. We have also taken the
first steps to protect the privacy of bank and credit card statements and
other financial records. Soon I will send legislation to the Congress to
finish that job. We must also act to prevent any genetic discrimination by
employers or insurers.

These steps will allow America to lead toward the far frontiers of science
and technology--enhancing our health, environment, and economy in ways we
cannot even imagine today.

Community

At a time when science, technology and the forces of globalization are
bringing so many changes into our lives, it is more important than ever
that we strengthen the bonds that root us in our local communities and in
our national communities.

No tie binds different people together like citizen service. There is a new
spirit of service in America--a movement we have supported with
AmeriCorps, an expanded Peace Corps, and unprecedented new partnerships
with businesses, foundations, and community groups. Partnerships to enlist
12,000 companies in moving 650,000 of our fellow citizens from welfare to
work. To battle drug abuse and AIDS. To teach young people to read. To Save
America's Treasures. To strengthen the arts. To fight teen pregnancy. To
prevent youth violence. To promote racial healing.

We can do even more to help Americans help each other. We should help
faith-based organizations do more to fight poverty and drug abuse and help
young people get back on the right track with initiatives like Second
Chance Homes to help unwed teen mothers. We should support Americans who
tithe and contribute to charities, but don't earn enough to claim a tax
deduction for it. Tonight, I propose new tax incentives to allow low- and
middle-income citizens to get that deduction.

We should do more to help new immigrants fully participate in the American
community--investing more to teach them civics and English. And since
everyone in our community counts, we must make sure everyone is counted in
this year's census.

Within ten years there will be no majority race in our largest state,
California. In a little more than 50 years, there will be no majority race
in America. In a more interconnected world, this diversity can be our
greatest strength. Just look around this chamber. We have members from
virtually every racial, ethnic, and religious background. And America is
stronger for it. But as we have seen, these differences all too often spark
hatred and division, even here at home.

We have seen a man dragged to death in Texas simply because he was black. A
young man murdered in Wyoming simply because he was gay. In the last year
alone, we've seen the shootings of African Americans, Asian Americans, and
Jewish children simply because of who they were. This is not the American
way. We must draw the line. Without delay, we must pass the Hate Crimes
Prevention Act and the Employment Non-Discrimination Act. And we should
reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act.

No American should be subjected to discrimination in finding a home,
getting a job, going to school, or securing a loan. Tonight, I propose the
largest ever investment to enforce America's civil rights laws. Protections
in law must be protections in fact.

Last February, I created the White House Office of One America to promote
racial reconciliation. That's what Hank Aaron, has done all his life. From
his days as baseball's all-time homerun king to his recent acts of healing,
he has always brought Americans together. We're pleased he's with us
tonight.

This fall, at the White House, one of America's leading scientists said
something we should all remember. He said all human beings, genetically,
are 99.9 percent the same. So modern science affirms what ancient faith has
always taught: the most important fact of life is our common humanity.

Therefore, we must do more than tolerate diversity--we must honor it and
celebrate it.

My fellow Americans, each time I prepare for the State of the Union, I
approach it with great hope and expectations for our nation. But tonight is
special--because we stand on the mountaintop of a new millennium. Behind
us we see the great expanse of American achievement; before us, even
grander frontiers of possibility.

We should be filled with gratitude and humility for our prosperity and
progress; with awe and joy at what lies ahead; and with absolute
determination to make the most of it.

When the framers finished crafting our Constitution, Benjamin Franklin
stood in Independence Hall and reflected on a painting of the sun, low on
the horizon. He said, "I have often wondered whether that sun was rising or
setting. Today," Franklin said, "I have the happiness to know it is a
rising sun." Well, today, because each generation of Americans has kept the
fire of freedom burning brightly, lighting those frontiers of possibility,
we still bask in the warmth of Mr. Franklin's rising sun.

After 224 years, the American Revolution continues. We remain a new nation.
As long as our dreams outweigh our memories, America will be forever young.
That is our destiny. And this is our moment.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.
Mr. Vice President, my old colleague from Massachusetts and your new
Speaker, John McCormack, Members of the 87th Congress, ladies and
gentlemen:

This week we begin anew our joint and separate efforts to build the
American future. But, sadly, we build without a man who linked a long past
with the present and looked strongly to the future. "Mister Sam" Rayburn is
gone. Neither this House nor the Nation is the same without him.

Members of the Congress, the Constitution makes us not rivals for power but
partners for progress. We are all trustees for the American people,
custodians of the American heritage. It is my task to report the State of
the Union--to improve it is the task of us all.

In the past year, I have traveled not only across our own land but to
other lands--to the North and the South, and across the seas. And I have
found--as I am sure you have, in your travels--that people everywhere,
in spite of occasional disappointments, look to us--not to our wealth or
power, but to the splendor of our ideals. For our Nation is commissioned
by history to be either an observer of freedom's failure or the cause of
its success. Our overriding obligation in the months ahead is to fulfill
the world's hopes by fulfilling our own faith.

I. STRENGTHENING THE ECONOMY

That task must begin at home. For if we cannot fulfill our own ideals here,
we cannot expect others to accept them. And when the youngest child alive
today has grown to the cares of manhood, our position in the world will
be determined first of all by what provisions we make today--for his
education, his health, and his opportunities for a good home and a good
job and a good life.

At home, we began the year in the valley of recession--we completed it on
the high road of recovery and growth. With the help of new Congressionally
approved or Administratively increased stimulants to our economy, the
number of major surplus labor areas has declined from 101 to 60;
non-agricultural employment has increased by more than a million jobs; and
the average factory work-week has risen to well over 40 hours. At year's
end the economy which Mr. Khrushchev once called a "stumbling horse" was
racing to new records in consumer spending, labor income, and industrial
production.

We are gratified--but we are not satisfied. Too many unemployed are still
looking for the blessings of prosperity. As those who leave our schools and
farms demand new jobs, automation takes old jobs away. To expand our growth
and job opportunities, I urge on the Congress three measures:

(1) First, the Manpower Training and Development Act, to stop the waste of
able-bodied men and women who want to work, but whose only skill has been
replaced by a machine, or moved with a mill, or shut down with a mine;

(2) Second, the Youth Employment Opportunities Act, to help train and place
not only the one million young Americans who are both out of school and out
of work, but the twenty-six million young Americans entering the labor
market in this decade; and

(3) Third, the 8 percent tax credit for investment in machinery and
equipment, which, combined with planned revisions of depreciation
allowances, will spur our modernization, our growth, and our ability to
compete abroad.

Moreover--pleasant as it may be to bask in the warmth of recovery--let us
not forget that we have suffered three recessions in the last 7 years. The
time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining--by filling three basic
gaps in our anti-recession protection. We need:

(1) First, Presidential stand-by authority, subject to Congressional veto,
to adjust personal income tax rates downward within a specified range and
time, to slow down an economic decline before it has dragged us all down;

(2) Second, Presidential stand-by authority, upon a given rise in the rate
of unemployment, to accelerate Federal and federally-aided capital
improvement programs; and

(3) Third, a permanent strengthening of our unemployment compensation
system--to maintain for our fellow citizens searching for a job who cannot
find it, their purchasing power and their living standards without constant
resort--as we have seen in recent years by the Congress and the
Administrations--to temporary supplements.

If we enact this six-part program, we can show the whole world that a free
economy need not be an unstable economy--that a free system need not leave
men unemployed--and that a free society is not only the most productive but
the most stable form of organization yet fashioned by man.

II. FIGHTING INFLATION

But recession is only one enemy of a free economy--inflation is another.
Last year, 1961, despite rising production and demand, consumer prices held
almost steady--and wholesale prices declined. This is the best record of
overall price stability of any comparable period of recovery since the end
of World War II.

Inflation too often follows in the shadow of growth--while price stability
is made easy by stagnation or controls. But we mean to maintain both
stability and growth in a climate of freedom.

Our first line of defense against inflation is the good sense and public
spirit of business and labor--keeping their total increases in wages and
profits in step with productivity. There is no single statistical test to
guide each company and each union. But I strongly urge them--for their
country's interest, and for their own--to apply the test of the public
interest to these transactions.

Within this same framework of growth and wage-price stability:

--This administration has helped keep our economy competitive by widening
the access of small business to credit and Government contracts, and by
stepping up the drive against monopoly, price-fixing, and racketeering;

--We will submit a Federal Pay Reform bill aimed at giving our classified,
postal, and other employees new pay scales more comparable to those of
private industry;

--We are holding the fiscal 1962 budget deficit far below the level
incurred after the last recession in 1958; and, finally,

--I am submitting for fiscal 1963 a balanced Federal Budget.

This is a joint responsibility, requiring Congressional cooperation on
appropriations, and on three sources of income in particular:

(1) First, an increase in postal rates, to end the postal deficit;

(2) Second, passage of the tax reforms previously urged, to remove
unwarranted tax preferences, and to apply to dividends and to interest the
same withholding requirements we have long applied to wages; and

(3) Third, extension of the present excise and corporation tax rates,
except for those changes--which will be recommended in a message--affecting
transportation.

III. GETTING AMERICA MOVING

But a stronger nation and economy require more than a balanced Budget. They
require progress in those programs that spur our growth and fortify our
strength.

CITIES

A strong America depends on its cities--America's glory, and sometimes
America's shame. To substitute sunlight for congestion and progress for
decay, we have stepped up existing urban renewal and housing programs, and
launched new ones--redoubled the attack on water pollution--speeded aid to
airports, hospitals, highways, and our declining mass transit systems--and
secured new weapons to combat organized crime, racketeering, and youth
delinquency, assisted by the coordinated and hard-hitting efforts of our
investigative services: the FBI, the Internal Revenue, the Bureau of
Narcotics, and many others. We shall need further anti-crime, mass transit,
and transportation legislation--and new tools to fight air pollution. And
with all this effort under way, both equity and common sense require that
our nation's urban areas--containing three-fourths of our population--sit
as equals at the Cabinet table. I urge a new Department of Urban Affairs
and Housing.

AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

A strong America also depends on its farms and natural resources. American
farmers took heart in 1961--from a billion dollar rise in farm income--and
from a hopeful start on reducing the farm surpluses. But we are still
operating under a patchwork accumulation of old laws, which cost us $1
billion a year in CCC carrying charges alone, yet fail to halt rural
poverty or boost farm earnings.

Our task is to master and turn to fully fruitful ends the magnificent
productivity of our farms and farmers. The revolution on our own
countryside stands in the sharpest contrast to the repeated farm failures
of the Communist nations and is a source of pride to us all. Since 1950 our
agricultural output per man-hour has actually doubled! Without new,
realistic measures, it will someday swamp our farmers and our taxpayers in
a national scandal or a farm depression.

I will, therefore, submit to the Congress a new comprehensive farm
program--tailored to fit the use of our land and the supplies of each crop
to the long-range needs of the sixties--and designed to prevent chaos in
the sixties with a program of common sense.

We also need for the sixties--if we are to bequeath our full national
estate to our heirs--a new long-range conservation and recreation
program--expansion of our superb national parks and forests--preservation
of our authentic wilderness areas--new starts on water and power projects
as our population steadily increases--and expanded REA generation and
transmission loans.

CIVIL RIGHTS

But America stands for progress in human rights as well as economic
affairs, and a strong America requires the assurance of full and equal
rights to all its citizens, of any race or of any color. This
Administration has shown as never before how much could be done through the
full use of Executive powers--through the enforcement of laws already
passed by the Congress--through persuasion, negotiation, and litigation, to
secure the constitutional rights of all: the right to vote, the right to
travel without hindrance across State lines, and the right to free public
education.

I issued last March a comprehensive order to guarantee the right to equal
employment opportunity in all Federal agencies and contractors. The Vice
President's Committee thus created has done much, including the voluntary
"Plans for Progress" which, in all sections of the country, are achieving a
quiet but striking success in opening up to all races new professional,
supervisory, and other job opportunities.

But there is much more to be done--by the Executive, by the courts, and by
the Congress. Among the bills now pending before you, on which the
executive departments will comment in detail, are appropriate methods of
strengthening these basic rights which have our full support. The right to
vote, for example, should no longer be denied through such arbitrary
devices on a local level, sometimes abused, such as literacy tests and poll
taxes. As we approach the 100th anniversary, next January, of the
Emancipation Proclamation, let the acts of every branch of the
Government--and every citizen--portray that "righteousness does exalt a
nation."

HEALTH AND WELFARE

Finally, a strong America cannot neglect the aspirations of its
citizens--the welfare of the needy, the health care of the elderly, the
education of the young. For we are not developing the Nation's wealth for
its own sake. Wealth is the means--and people are the ends. All our
material riches will avail us little if we do not use them to expand the
opportunities of our people.

Last year, we improved the diet of needy people--provided more hot lunches
and fresh milk to school children--built more college dormitories--and, for
the elderly, expanded private housing, nursing homes, health services, and
social security. But we have just begun.

To help those least fortunate of all, I am recommending a new public
welfare program, stressing services instead of support, rehabilitation
instead of relief, and training for useful work instead of prolonged
dependency.

To relieve the critical shortage of doctors and dentists--and this is a
matter which should concern us all--and expand research, I urge action to
aid medical and dental colleges and scholarships and to establish new
National Institutes of Health.

To take advantage of modern vaccination achievements, I am proposing a mass
immunization program, aimed at the virtual elimination of such ancient
enemies of our children as polio, diphtheria, whooping cough, and tetanus.

To protect our consumers from the careless and the unscrupulous, I shall
recommend improvements in the Food and Drug laws--strengthening inspection
and standards, halting unsafe and worthless products, preventing misleading
labels, and cracking down on the illicit sale of habit-forming drugs.

But in matters of health, no piece of unfinished business is more important
or more urgent than the enactment under the social security system of
health insurance for the aged.

For our older citizens have longer and more frequent illnesses, higher
hospital and medical bills and too little income to pay them. Private
health insurance helps very few--for its cost is high and its coverage
limited. Public welfare cannot help those too proud to seek relief but
hard-pressed to pay their own bills. Nor can their children or
grandchildren always sacrifice their own health budgets to meet this
constant drain.

Social security has long helped to meet the hardships of retirement, death,
and disability. I now urge that its coverage be extended without further
delay to provide health insurance for the elderly.

EDUCATION

Equally important to our strength is the quality of our education. Eight
million adult Americans are classified as functionally illiterate. This is
a disturbing figure--reflected in Selective Service rejection
rates--reflected in welfare rolls and crime rates. And I shall recommend
plans for a massive attack to end this adult illiteracy.

I shall also recommend bills to improve educational quality, to stimulate
the arts, and, at the college level, to provide Federal loans for the
construction of academic facilities and Federally financed scholarships.

If this Nation is to grow in wisdom and strength, then every able high
school graduate should have the opportunity to develop his talents. Yet
nearly half lack either the funds or the facilities to attend college.
Enrollments are going to double in our colleges in the short space of 10
years. The annual cost per student is skyrocketing to astronomical
levels--now averaging $1,650 a year, although almost half of our families
earn less than $5,000. They cannot afford such costs--but this Nation
cannot afford to maintain its military power and neglect its brainpower.

But excellence in education must begin at the elementary level. I sent to
the Congress last year a proposal for Federal aid to public school
construction and teachers' salaries. I believe that bill, which passed the
Senate and received House Committee approval, offered the minimum amount
required by our needs and--in terms of across-the-board aid--the maximum
scope permitted by our Constitution. I therefore see no reason to weaken or
withdraw that bill: and I urge its passage at this session.

"Civilization," said H. G. Wells, "is a race between education and
catastrophe." It is up to you in this Congress to determine the winner of
that race.

These are not unrelated measures addressed to specific gaps or grievances
in our national life. They are the pattern of our intentions and the
foundation of our hopes. "I believe in democracy," said Woodrow Wilson,
"because it releases the energy of every human being." The dynamic of
democracy is the power and the purpose of the individual, and the policy of
this administration is to give to the individual the opportunity to realize
his own highest possibilities.

Our program is to open to all the opportunity for steady and productive
employment, to remove from all the handicap of arbitrary or irrational
exclusion, to offer to all the facilities for education and health and
welfare, to make society the servant of the individual and the individual
the source of progress, and thus to realize for all the full promise of
American life.

IV. OUR GOALS ABROAD

All of these efforts at home give meaning to our efforts abroad. Since the
close of the Second World War, a global civil war has divided and tormented
mankind. But it is not our military might, or our higher standard of
living, that has most distinguished us from our adversaries. It is our
belief that the state is the servant of the citizen and not his master.

This basic clash of ideas and wills is but one of the forces reshaping our
globe--swept as it is by the tides of hope and fear, by crises in the
headlines today that become mere footnotes tomorrow. Both the successes and
the setbacks of the past year remain on our agenda of unfinished business.
For every apparent blessing contains the seeds of danger--every area of
trouble gives out a ray of hope--and the one unchangeable certainty is that
nothing is certain or unchangeable.

Yet our basic goal remains the same: a peaceful world community of free and
independent states--free to choose their own future and their own system,
so long as it does not threaten the freedom of others.

Some may choose forms and ways that we would not choose for ourselves--but
it is not for us that they are choosing. We can welcome diversity--the
Communists cannot. For we offer a world of choice--they offer the world of
coercion. And the way of the past shows clearly that freedom, not coercion,
is the wave of the future. At times our goal has been obscured by crisis or
endangered by conflict--but it draws sustenance from five basic sources of
strength:

--the moral and physical strength of the United States;

--the united strength of the Atlantic Community;

--the regional strength of our Hemispheric relations;

--the creative strength of our efforts in the new and developing nations;
and

--the peace-keeping strength of the United Nations.

V. OUR MILITARY STRENGTH

Our moral and physical strength begins at home as already discussed. But it
includes our military strength as well. So long as fanaticism and fear
brood over the affairs of men, we must arm to deter others from
aggression.

In the past 12 months our military posture has steadily improved. We
increased the previous defense budget by 15 percent--not in the expectation
of war but for the preservation of peace. We more than doubled our
acquisition rate of Polaris submarines--we doubled the production capacity
for Minuteman missiles--and increased by 50 percent the number of manned
bombers standing ready on a 15 minute alert. This year the combined force
levels planned under our new Defense budget--including nearly three hundred
additional Polaris and Minuteman missiles--have been precisely calculated
to insure the continuing strength of our nuclear deterrent.

But our strength may be tested at many levels. We intend to have at all
times the capacity to resist non-nuclear or limited attacks--as a
complement to our nuclear capacity, not as a substitute. We have rejected
any all-or-nothing posture which would leave no choice but inglorious
retreat or unlimited retaliation.

Thus we have doubled the number of ready combat divisions in the Army's
strategic reserve--increased our troops in Europe--built up the
Marines--added new sealift and airlift capacity--modernized our weapons and
ammunition--expanded our anti-guerrilla forces--and increased the active
fleet by more than 70 vessels and our tactical air forces by nearly a dozen
wings.

Because we needed to reach this higher long-term level of readiness more
quickly, 155,000 members of the Reserve and National Guard were activated
under the Act of this Congress. Some disruptions and distress were
inevitable. But the overwhelming majority bear their burdens--and their
Nation's burdens--with admirable and traditional devotion.

In the coming year, our reserve programs will be revised--two Army
Divisions will, I hope, replace those Guard Divisions on duty--and
substantial other increases will boost our Air Force fighter units, the
procurement of equipment, and our continental defense and warning efforts.
The Nation's first serious civil defense shelter program is under way,
identifying, marking, and stocking 50 million spaces; and I urge your
approval of Federal incentives for the construction of public fall-out
shelters in schools and hospitals and similar centers.

VI. THE UNITED NATIONS

But arms alone are not enough to keep the peace--it must be kept by men.
Our instrument and our hope is the United Nations--and I see little merit
in the impatience of those who would abandon this imperfect world
instrument because they dislike our imperfect world. For the troubles of
a world organization merely reflect the troubles of the world itself. And
if the organization is weakened, these troubles can only increase. We may
not always agree with every detailed action taken by every officer of the
United Nations, or with every voting majority. But as an institution, it
should have in the future, as it has had in the past since its inception,
no stronger or more faithful member than the United States of America.

In 1961 the peace-keeping strength of the United Nations was reinforced.
And those who preferred or predicted its demise, envisioning a troika in
the seat of Hammarskjold--or Red China inside the Assembly--have seen
instead a new vigor, under a new Secretary General and a fully independent
Secretariat. In making plans for a new forum and principles on disarmament
--for peace-keeping in outer space--for a decade of development effort--the
UN fulfilled its Charter's lofty aim.

Eighteen months ago the tangled and turbulent Congo presented the UN with
its gravest challenge. The prospect was one of chaos--or certain big-power
confrontation, with all of its hazards and all of its risks, to us and to
others. Today the hopes have improved for peaceful conciliation within a
united Congo. This is the objective of our policy in this important area.

No policeman is universally popular--particularly when he uses his stick to
restore law and order on his beat. Those members who are willing to
contribute their votes and their views--but very little else--have created
a serious deficit by refusing to pay their share of special UN assessments.
Yet they do pay their annual assessments to retain their votes--and a new
UN Bond issue, financing special operations for the next 18 months, is to
be repaid with interest from these regular assessments. This is clearly in
our interest. It will not only keep the UN solvent, but require all voting
members to pay their fair share of its activities. Our share of special
operations has long been much higher than our share of the annual
assessment--and the bond issue will in effect reduce our disproportionate
obligation, and for these reasons, I am urging Congress to approve our
participation.

With the approval of this Congress, we have undertaken in the past year a
great new effort in outer space. Our aim is not simply to be first on the
moon, any more than Charles Lindbergh's real aim was to be the first to
Paris. His aim was to develop the techniques of our own country and other
countries in the field of air and the atmosphere, and our objective in
making this effort, which we hope will place one of our citizens on the
moon, is to develop in a new frontier of science, commerce and cooperation,
the position of the United States and the Free World.

This Nation belongs among the first to explore it, and among the first--if
not the first--we shall be. We are offering our know-how and our
cooperation to the United Nations. Our satellites will soon be providing
other nations with improved weather observations. And I shall soon send to
the Congress a measure to govern the financing and operation of an
International Communications Satellite system, in a manner consistent with
the public interest and our foreign policy.

But peace in space will help us naught once peace on earth is gone. World
order will be secured only when the whole world has laid down these weapons
which seem to offer us present security but threaten the future survival of
the human race. That armistice day seems very far away. The vast resources
of this planet are being devoted more and more to the means of destroying,
instead of enriching, human life.

But the world was not meant to be a prison in which man awaits his
execution. Nor has mankind survived the tests and trials of thousands of
years to surrender everything--including its existence--now. This Nation
has the will and the faith to make a supreme effort to break the log jam
on disarmament and nuclear tests--and we will persist until we prevail,
until the rule of law has replaced the ever dangerous use of force.

VII. LATIN AMERICA

I turn now to a prospect of great promise: our Hemispheric relations. The
Alliance for Progress is being rapidly transformed from proposal to
program. Last month in Latin America I saw for myself the quickening of
hope, the revival of confidence, the new trust in our country--among
workers and farmers as well as diplomats. We have pledged our help in
speeding their economic, educational, and social progress. The Latin
American Republics have in turn pledged a new and strenuous effort of
self-help and self-reform.

To support this historic undertaking, I am proposing--under the authority
contained in the bills of the last session of the Congress--a special
long-term Alliance for Progress fund of $3 billion. Combined with our Food
for Peace, Export-Import Bank, and other resources, this will provide more
than $1 billion a year in new support for the Alliance. In addition, we
have increased twelve-fold our Spanish and Portuguese language broadcasting
in Latin America, and improved Hemispheric trade and defense. And while
the blight of communism has been increasingly exposed and isolated in the
Americas, liberty has scored a gain. The people of the Dominican Republic,
with our firm encouragement and help, and those of our sister Republics of
this Hemisphere, are safely passing through the treacherous course from
dictatorship through disorder towards democracy.

VIII. THE NEW AND DEVELOPING NATIONS

Our efforts to help other new or developing nations, and to strengthen
their stand for freedom, have also made progress. A newly unified Agency
for International Development is reorienting our foreign assistance to
emphasize long-term development loans instead of grants, more economic aid
instead of military, individual plans to meet the individual needs of the
nations, and new standards on what they must do to marshal their own
resources.

A newly conceived Peace Corps is winning friends and helping people in
fourteen countries--supplying trained and dedicated young men and women, to
give these new nations a hand in building a society, and a glimpse of the
best that is in our country. If there is a problem here, it is that we
cannot supply the spontaneous and mounting demand.

A newly-expanded Food for Peace Program is feeding the hungry of many
lands with the abundance of our productive farms--providing lunches for
children in school, wages for economic development, relief for the victims
of flood and famine, and a better diet for millions whose daily bread is
their chief concern.

These programs help people; and, by helping people, they help freedom. The
views of their governments may sometimes be very different from ours--but
events in Africa, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe teach us never to
write off any nation as lost to the Communists. That is the lesson of our
time. We support the independence of those newer or weaker states whose
history, geography, economy or lack of power impels them to remain outside
"entangling alliances"--as we did for more than a century. For the
independence of nations is a bar to the Communists' "grand design"--it is
the basis of our own.

In the past year, for example, we have urged a neutral and independent
Laos--regained there a common policy with our major allies--and insisted
that a cease-fire precede negotiations. While a workable formula for
supervising its independence is still to be achieved, both the spread
of war--which might have involved this country also--and a Communist
occupation have thus far been prevented.

A satisfactory settlement in Laos would also help to achieve and safeguard
the peace in Viet-Nam--where the foe is increasing his tactics of
terror--where our own efforts have been stepped up--and where the local
government has initiated new programs and reforms to broaden the base of
resistance. The systematic aggression now bleeding that country is not a
"war of liberation"--for Viet-Nam is already free. It is a war of attempted
subjugation--and it will be resisted.

IX. THE ATLANTIC COMMUNITY

Finally, the united strength of the Atlantic Community has flourished in
the last year under severe tests. NATO has increased both the number and
the readiness of its air, ground, and naval units--both its nuclear and
non-nuclear capabilities. Even greater efforts by all its members are still
required. Nevertheless our unity of purpose and will has been, I believe,
immeasurably strengthened.

The threat to the brave city of Berlin remains. In these last 6 months the
Allies have made it unmistakably clear that our presence in Berlin, our
free access thereto, and the freedom of two million West Berliners would
not be surrendered either to force or through appeasement--and to maintain
those rights and obligations, we are prepared to talk, when appropriate,
and to fight, if necessary. Every member of NATO stands with us in a common
commitment to preserve this symbol of free man's will to remain free.

I cannot now predict the course of future negotiations over Berlin. I can
only say that we are sparing no honorable effort to find a peaceful and
mutually acceptable resolution of this problem. I believe such a resolution
can be found, and with it an improvement in our relations with the Soviet
Union, if only the leaders in the Kremlin will recognize the basic rights
and interests involved, and the interest of all mankind in peace.

But the Atlantic Community is no longer concerned with purely military
aims. As its common undertakings grow at an ever-increasing pace, we are,
and increasingly will be, partners in aid, trade, defense, diplomacy, and
monetary affairs.

The emergence of the new Europe is being matched by the emergence of new
ties across the Atlantic. It is a matter of undramatic daily cooperation in
hundreds of workaday tasks: of currencies kept in effective relation, of
development loans meshed together, of standardized weapons, and concerted
diplomatic positions. The Atlantic Community grows, not like a volcanic
mountain, by one mighty explosion, but like a coral reef, from the
accumulating activity of all.

Thus, we in the free world are moving steadily toward unity and
cooperation, in the teeth of that old Bolshevik prophecy, and at the very
time when extraordinary rumbles of discord can be heard across the Iron
Curtain. It is not free societies which bear within them the seeds of
inevitable disunity.

X. OUR BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

On one special problem, of great concern to our friends, and to us, I am
proud to give the Congress an encouraging report. Our efforts to safeguard
the dollar are progressing. In the 11 months preceding last February 1, we
suffered a net loss of nearly $2 billion in gold. In the 11 months that
followed, the loss was just over half a billion dollars. And our deficit in
our basic transactions with the rest of the world--trade, defense, foreign
aid, and capital, excluding volatile short-term flows--has been reduced
from $2 billion for 1960 to about one-third that amount for 1961.
Speculative fever against the dollar is ending--and confidence in the
dollar has been restored.

We did not--and could not--achieve these gains through import restrictions,
troop withdrawals, exchange controls, dollar devaluation or choking off
domestic recovery. We acted not in panic but in perspective. But the
problem is not yet solved. Persistently large deficits would endanger our
economic growth and our military and defense commitments abroad. Our goal
must be a reasonable equilibrium in our balance of payments. With the
cooperation of the Congress, business, labor, and our major allies, that
goal can be reached.

We shall continue to attract foreign tourists and investments to our
shores, to seek increased military purchases here by our allies, to
maximize foreign aid procurement from American firms, to urge increased aid
from other fortunate nations to the less fortunate, to seek tax laws which
do not favor investment in other industrialized nations or tax havens, and
to urge coordination of allied fiscal and monetary policies so as to
discourage large and disturbing capital movements.

TRADE

Above all, if we are to pay for our commitments abroad, we must expand our
exports. Our businessmen must be export conscious and export competitive.
Our tax policies must spur modernization of our plants--our wage and price
gains must be consistent with productivity to hold the line on prices--our
export credit and promotion campaigns for American industries must continue
to expand.

But the greatest challenge of all is posed by the growth of the European
Common Market. Assuming the accession of the United Kingdom, there will
arise across the Atlantic a trading partner behind a single external tariff
similar to ours with an economy which nearly equals our own. Will we in
this country adapt our thinking to these new prospects and patterns--or
will we wait until events have passed us by?

This is the year to decide. The Reciprocal Trade Act is expiring. We need a
new law--a wholly new approach--a bold new instrument of American trade
policy. Our decision could well affect the unity of the West, the course of
the Cold War, and the economic growth of our Nation for a generation to
come.

If we move decisively, our factories and farms can increase their sales to
their richest, fastest-growing market. Our exports will increase. Our
balance of payments position will improve. And we will have forged across
the Atlantic a trading partnership with vast resources for freedom.

If, on the other hand, we hang back in deference to local economic
pressures, we will find ourselves cut off from our major allies.
Industries--and I believe this is most vital--industries will move their
plants and jobs and capital inside the walls of the Common Market, and
jobs, therefore, will be lost here in the United States if they cannot
otherwise compete for its consumers. Our farm surpluses--our balance of
trade, as you all know, to Europe, the Common Market, in farm products, is
nearly three or four to one in our favor, amounting to one of the best
earners of dollars in our balance of payments structure, and without
entrance to this Market, without the ability to enter it, our farm
surpluses will pile up in the Middle West, tobacco in the South, and other
commodities, which have gone through Western Europe for 15 years. Our
balance of payments position will worsen. Our consumers will lack a wider
choice of goods at lower prices. And millions of American workers--whose
jobs depend on the sale or the transportation or the distribution of
exports or imports, or whose jobs will be endangered by the movement of our
capital to Europe, or whose jobs can be maintained only in an expanding
economy--these millions of workers in your home States and mine will see
their real interests sacrificed.

Members of the Congress: The United States did not rise to greatness by
waiting for others to lead. This Nation is the world's foremost
manufacturer, farmer, banker, consumer, and exporter. The Common Market is
moving ahead at an economic growth rate twice ours. The Communist economic
offensive is under way. The opportunity is ours--the initiative is up to
us--and I believe that 1962 is the time.

To seize that initiative, I shall shortly send to the Congress a new
five-year Trade Expansion Action, far-reaching in scope but designed with
great care to make certain that its benefits to our people far outweigh any
risks. The bill will permit the gradual elimination of tariffs here in the
United States and in the Common Market on those items in which we together
supply 80 percent of the world's trade--mostly items in which our own
ability to compete is demonstrated by the fact that we sell abroad, in
these items, substantially more than we import. This step will make it
possible for our major industries to compete with their counterparts in
Western Europe for access to European consumers.

On other goods the bill will permit a gradual reduction of duties up to 50
percent--permitting bargaining by major categories--and provide for
appropriate and tested forms of assistance to firms and employees adjusting
to import competition. We are not neglecting the safeguards provided by
peril points, an escape clause, or the National Security Amendment. Nor are
we abandoning our non-European friends or our traditional "most-favored
nation" principle. On the contrary, the bill will provide new encouragement
for their sale of tropical agricultural products, so important to our
friends in Latin America, who have long depended upon the European market,
who now find themselves faced with new challenges which we must join with
them in overcoming.

Concessions, in this bargaining, must of course be reciprocal, not
unilateral. The Common Market will not fulfill its own high promise unless
its outside tariff walls are low. The dangers of restriction or timidity in
our own policy have counterparts for our friends in Europe. For together we
face a common challenge: to enlarge the prosperity of free men
everywhere--to build in partnership a new trading community in which all
free nations may gain from the productive energy of free competitive
effort.

These various elements in our foreign policy lead, as I have said, to a
single goal--the goal of a peaceful world of free and independent states.
This is our guide for the present and our vision for the future--a free
community of nations, independent but interdependent, uniting north and
south, east and west, in one great family of man, outgrowing and
transcending the hates and fears that rend our age.

We will not reach that goal today, or tomorrow. We may not reach it in our
own lifetime. But the quest is the greatest adventure of our century. We
sometimes chafe at the burden of our obligations, the complexity of our
decisions, the agony of our choices. But there is no comfort or security
for us in evasion, no solution in abdication, no relief in
irresponsibility.

A year ago, in assuming the tasks of the Presidency, I said that few
generations, in all history, had been granted the role of being the great
defender of freedom in its hour of maximum danger. This is our good
fortune; and I welcome it now as I did a year ago. For it is the fate of
this generation--of you in the Congress and of me as President--to live
with a struggle we did not start, in a world we did not make. But the
pressures of life are not always distributed by choice. And while no
nation has ever faced such a challenge, no nation has ever been so ready
to seize the burden and the glory of freedom.

And in this high endeavor, may God watch over the United States of America.
Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the 88th Congress:

I congratulate you all--not merely on your electoral victory but on your
selected role in history. For you and I are privileged to serve the great
Republic in what could be the most decisive decade in its long history. The
choices we make, for good or ill, may well shape the state of the Union for
generations yet to come.

Little more than 100 weeks ago I assumed the office of President of the
United States. In seeking the help of the Congress and our countrymen, I
pledged no easy answers. I pledged--and asked--only toil and dedication.
These the Congress and the people have given in good measure. And today,
having witnessed in recent months a heightened respect for our national
purpose and power--having seen the courageous calm of a united people in
a perilous hour--and having observed a steady improvement in the
opportunities and well-being of our citizens--I can report to you that
the state of this old but youthful Union, in the 175th year of its life,
is good.

In the world beyond our borders, steady progress has been made in building
a world of order. The people of West Berlin remain both free and secure. A
settlement, though still precarious, has been reached in Laos. The
spearpoint of aggression has been blunted in Viet-Nam. The end of agony may
be in sight in the Congo. The doctrine of troika is dead. And, while danger
continues, a deadly threat has been removed in Cuba.

At home, the recession is behind us. Well over a million more men and women
are working today than were working 2 years ago. The average factory
work week is once again more than 40 hours; our industries are turning out
more goods than ever before; and more than half of the manufacturing
capacity that lay silent and wasted 100 weeks ago is humming with
activity.

In short, both at home and abroad, there may now be a temptation to relax.
For the road has been long, the burden heavy, and the pace consistently
urgent.

But we cannot be satisfied to rest here. This is the side of the hill, not
the top. The mere absence of war is not peace. The mere absence of
recession is not growth. We have made a beginning--but we have only begun.

Now the time has come to make the most of our gains--to translate the
renewal of our national strength into the achievement of our national
purpose.

                                   I.

America has enjoyed 22 months of uninterrupted economic recovery. But
recovery is not enough. If we are to prevail in the long run, we must
expand the long-run strength of our economy. We must move along the path to
a higher rate of growth and full employment.

For this would mean tens of billions of dollars more each year in
production, profits, wages, and public revenues. It would mean an end to
the persistent slack which has kept our unemployment at or above 5 percent
for 61 out of the past 62 months--and an end to the growing pressures for
such restrictive measures as the 35-hour week, which alone could increase
hourly labor costs by as much as 14 percent, start a new wage-price spiral
of inflation, and undercut our efforts to compete with other nations.

To achieve these greater gains, one step, above all, is essential--the
enactment this year of a substantial reduction and revision in Federal
income taxes.

For it is increasingly clear--to those in Government, business, and labor
who are responsible for our economy's success--that our obsolete tax system
exerts too heavy a drag on private purchasing power, profits, and
employment. Designed to check inflation in earlier years, it now checks
growth instead. It discourages extra effort and risk. It distorts the use
of resources. It invites recurrent recessions, depresses our Federal
revenues, and causes chronic budget deficits.

Now, when the inflationary pressures of the war and the post-war years no
longer threaten, and the dollar commands new respect--now, when no military
crisis strains our resources--now is the time to act. We cannot afford to
be timid or slow. For this is the most urgent task confronting the Congress
in 1963.

In an early message, I shall propose a permanent reduction in tax rates
which will lower liabilities by $13.5 billion. Of this, $11 billion results
from reducing individual tax rates, which now range between 20 and 91
percent, to a more sensible range of 14 to 65 percent, with a split in the
present first bracket. Two and one-half billion dollars results from
reducing corporate tax rates, from 52 percent--which gives the Government
today a majority interest in profits--to the permanent pre-Korean level of
47 percent. This is in addition to the more than $2 billion cut in
corporate tax liabilities resulting from last year's investment credit and
depreciation reform.

To achieve this reduction within the limits of a manageable budgetary
deficit, I urge: first, that these cuts be phased over 3 calendar years,
beginning in 1963 with a cut of some $6 billion at annual rates; second,
that these reductions be coupled with selected structural changes,
beginning in 1964, which will broaden the tax base, end unfair or
unnecessary preferences, remove or lighten certain hardships, and in the
net offset some $3.5 billion of the revenue loss; and third, that budgetary
receipts at the outset be increased by $1.5 billion a year, without any
change in tax liabilities, by gradually shifting the tax payments of large
corporations to a more current time schedule. This combined program, by
increasing the amount of our national income, will in time result in still
higher Federal revenues. It is a fiscally responsible program--the surest
and the soundest way of achieving in time a balanced budget in a balanced
full employment economy.

This net reduction in tax liabilities of $10 billion will increase the
purchasing power of American families and business enterprises in every tax
bracket, with greatest increase going to our low-income consumers. It will,
in addition, encourage the initiative and risk-taking on which our free
system depends--induce more investment, production, and capacity use--help
provide the 2 million new jobs we need every year--and reinforce the
American principle of additional reward for additional effort.

I do not say that a measure for tax reduction and reform is the only way to
achieve these goals.

No doubt a massive increase in Federal spending could also create jobs
and growth, but in today's setting, private consumers, employers, and
investors should be given a full opportunity first.

No doubt a temporary tax cut could provide a spur to our economy--but a
long-run problem compels a long-run solution.

No doubt a reduction in either individual or corporation taxes alone
would be of great help--but corporations need customers and job seekers
need jobs.

No doubt tax reduction without reform would sound simpler and more
attractive to many--but our growth is also hampered by a host of tax
inequities and special preferences which have distorted the flow of
investment.

And finally, there are no doubt some who would prefer to put off a tax
cut in the hope that ultimately an end to the cold war would make possible
an equivalent cut in expenditures--but that end is not in view and to wait
for it would be costly and self-defeating.

In submitting a tax program which will, of course, temporarily increase the
deficit but can ultimately end it--and in recognition of the need to
control expenditures--I will shortly submit a fiscal 1964 administrative
budget which, while allowing for needed rises in defense, space, and fixed
interest charges, holds total expenditures for all other purposes below
this year's level.

This requires the reduction or postponement of many desirable programs, the
absorption of a large part of last year's Federal pay raise through
personnel and other economies, the termination of certain installations and
projects, and the substitution in several programs of private for public
credit. But I am convinced that the enactment this year of tax reduction
and tax reform overshadows all other domestic problems in this Congress.
For we cannot for long lead the cause of peace and freedom, if we ever
cease to set the pace here at home.

                                  II.

Tax reduction alone, however, is not enough to strengthen our society, to
provide opportunities for the four million Americans who are born every
year, to improve the lives of 32 million Americans who live on the
outskirts of poverty.

The quality of American life must keep pace with the quantity of American
goods.

This country cannot afford to be materially rich and spiritually poor.

Therefore, by holding down the budgetary cost of existing programs to keep
within the limitations I have set, it is both possible and imperative to
adopt other new measures that we cannot afford to postpone.

These measures are based on a series of fundamental premises, grouped under
four related headings:

First, we need to strengthen our Nation by investing in our youth.

The future of any country which is dependent upon the will and wisdom of
its citizens is damaged, and irreparably damaged, whenever any of its
children is not educated to the full extent of his talent, from grade
school through graduate school. Today, an estimated 4 out of every 10
students in the 5th grade will not even finish high school--and that is a
waste we cannot afford.

In addition, there is no reason why one million young Americans, out of
school and out of work, should all remain unwanted and often untrained on
our city streets when their energies can be put to good use.

Finally, the overseas success of our Peace Corps volunteers, most of them
young men and women carrying skills and ideas to needy people, suggests the
merit of a similar corps serving our own community needs: in mental
hospitals, on Indian reservations, in centers for the aged or for young
delinquents, in schools for the illiterate or the handicapped. As the
idealism of our youth has served world peace, so can it serve the domestic
tranquility.

Second, we need to strengthen our Nation by safeguarding its health.

Our working men and women, instead of being forced to beg for help from
public charity once they are old and ill, should start contributing now to
their own retirement health program through the Social Security System.

Moreover, all our miracles of medical research will count for little if
we cannot reverse the growing nationwide shortage of doctors, dentists, and
nurses, and the widespread shortages of nursing homes and modern urban
hospital facilities. Merely to keep the present ratio of doctors and
dentists from declining any further, we must over the next 10 years
increase the capacity of our medical schools by 50 percent and our dental
schools by 100 percent.

Finally, and of deep concern, I believe that the abandonment of the
mentally ill and the mentally retarded to the grim mercy of custodial
institutions too often inflicts on them and on their families a needless
cruelty which this Nation should not endure. The incidence of mental
retardation in this country is three times as high as that of Sweden, for
example--and that figure can and must be reduced.

Third, we need to strengthen our Nation by protecting the basic rights of
its citizens.

The right to competent counsel must be assured to every man accused of
crime in Federal court, regardless of his means.

And the most precious and powerful right in the world, the right to vote
in a free American election, must not be denied to any citizen on grounds
of his race or color. I wish that all qualified Americans permitted to vote
were willing to vote, but surely in this centennial year of Emancipation
all those who are willing to vote should always be permitted.

Fourth, we need to strengthen our Nation by making the best and the most
economical use of its resources and facilities.

Our economic health depends on healthy transportation arteries; and I
believe the way to a more modern, economical choice of national
transportation service is through increased competition and decreased
regulation. Local mass transit, faring even worse, is as essential a
community service as hospitals and highways. Nearly three-fourths of our
citizens live in urban areas, which occupy only 2 percent of our land--and
if local transit is to survive and relieve the congestion of these cities,
it needs Federal stimulation and assistance.

Next, this Government is in the storage and stockpile business to the
melancholy tune of more than $16 billion. We must continue to support farm
income, but we should not pile more farm surpluses on top of the $7.5
billion we already own. We must maintain a stockpile of strategic
materials, but the $8.5 billion we have acquired--for reasons both good and
bad--is much more than we need; and we should be empowered to dispose of
the excess in ways which will not cause market disruption.

Finally, our already overcrowded national parks and recreation areas will
have twice as many visitors 10 years from now as they do today. If we do
not plan today for the future growth of these and other great natural
assets--not only parks and forests but wildlife and wilderness preserves,
and water projects of all kinds--our children and their children will be
poorer in every sense of the word.

These are not domestic concerns alone. For upon our achievement of greater
vitality and strength here at home hang our fate and future in the world:
our ability to sustain and supply the security of free men and nations, our
ability to command their respect for our leadership, our ability to expand
our trade without threat to our balance of payments, and our ability to
adjust to the changing demands of cold war competition and challenge.

We shall be judged more by what we do at home than by what we preach
abroad. Nothing we could do to help the developing countries would help
them half as much as a booming U.S. economy. And nothing our opponents
could do to encourage their own ambitions would encourage them half as much
as a chronic, lagging U.S. economy. These domestic tasks do not divert
energy from our security--they provide the very foundation for freedom's
survival and success.

                                 III.

Turning to the world outside, it was only a few years ago--in Southeast
Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe, Latin America, even outer space--that
communism sought to convey the image of a unified, confident, and expanding
empire, closing in on a sluggish America and a free world in disarray. But
few people would hold to that picture today.

In these past months we have reaffirmed the scientific and military
superiority of freedom. We have doubled our efforts in space, to assure us
of being first in the future. We have undertaken the most far-reaching
defense improvements in the peacetime history of this country. And we have
maintained the frontiers of freedom from Viet-Nam to West Berlin.

But complacency or self-congratulation can imperil our security as much as
the weapons of tyranny. A moment of pause is not a promise of peace.
Dangerous problems remain from Cuba to the South China Sea. The world's
prognosis prescribes, in short, not a year's vacation for us, but a year of
obligation and opportunity.

Four special avenues of opportunity stand out: the Atlantic Alliance, the
developing nations, the new Sino-Soviet difficulties, and the search for
worldwide peace.

                                 IV.

First, how fares the grand alliance? Free Europe is entering into a new
phase of its long and brilliant history. The era of colonial expansion has
passed; the era of national rivalries is fading; and a new era of
interdependence and unity is taking shape. Defying the old prophecies of
Marx, consenting to what no conqueror could ever compel, the free nations
of Europe are moving toward a unity of purpose and power and policy in
every sphere of activity.

For 17 years this movement has had our consistent support, both political
and economic. Far from resenting the new Europe, we regard her as a welcome
partner, not a rival. For the road to world peace and freedom is still
long, and there are burdens which only full partners can share--in
supporting the common defense, in expanding world trade, in aligning our
balance of payments, in aiding the emergent nations, in concerting
political and economic policies, and in welcoming to our common effort
other industrialized nations, notably Japan, whose remarkable economic and
political development of the 1950's permits it now to play on the world
scene a major constructive role.

No doubt differences of opinion will continue to get more attention than
agreements on action, as Europe moves from independence to more formal
interdependence. But these are honest differences among honorable
associates--more real and frequent, in fact, among our Western European
allies than between them and the United States. For the unity of freedom
has never relied on uniformity of opinion. But the basic agreement of this
alliance on fundamental issues continues.

The first task of the alliance remains the common defense. Last month Prime
Minister Macmillan and I laid plans for a new stage in our long cooperative
effort, one which aims to assist in the wider task of framing a common
nuclear defense for the whole alliance.

The Nassau agreement recognizes that the security of the West is
indivisible, and so must be our defense. But it also recognizes that this
is an alliance of proud and sovereign nations, and works best when we do
not forget it. It recognizes further that the nuclear defense of the West
is not a matter for the present nuclear powers alone--that France will be
such a power in the future--and that ways must be found without increasing
the hazards of nuclear diffusion, to increase the role of our other
partners in planning, manning, and directing a truly multilateral nuclear
force within an increasingly intimate NATO alliance. Finally, the Nassau
agreement recognizes that nuclear defense is not enough, that the agreed
NATO levels of conventional strength must be met, and that the alliance
cannot afford to be in a position of having to answer every threat with
nuclear weapons or nothing.

We remain too near the Nassau decisions, and too far from their full
realization, to know their place in history. But I believe that, for the
first time, the door is open for the nuclear defense of the alliance to
become a source of confidence, instead of a cause of contention.

The next most pressing concern of the alliance is our common economic goals
of trade and growth. This Nation continues to be concerned about its
balance-of-payments deficit, which, despite its decline, remains a stubborn
and troublesome problem. We believe, moreover, that closer economic ties
among all free nations are essential to prosperity and peace. And neither
we nor the members of the European Common Market are so affluent that we
can long afford to shelter high cost farms or factories from the winds of
foreign competition, or to restrict the channels of trade with other
nations of the free world. If the Common Market should move toward
protectionism and restrictionism, it would undermine its own basic
principles. This Government means to use the authority conferred on it last
year by the Congress to encourage trade expansion on both sides of the
Atlantic and around the world.

                                   V.

Second, what of the developing and non-aligned nations? They were shocked
by the Soviets' sudden and secret attempt to transform Cuba into a nuclear
striking base--and by Communist China's arrogant invasion of India. They
have been reassured by our prompt assistance to India, by our support
through the United Nations of the Congo's unification, by our patient
search for disarmament, and by the improvement in our treatment of citizens
and visitors whose skins do not happen to be white. And as the older
colonialism recedes, and the neo-colonialism of the Communist powers stands
out more starkly than ever, they realize more clearly that the issue in the
world struggle is not communism versus capitalism, but coercion versus free
choice.

They are beginning to realize that the longing for independence is the same
the world over, whether it is the independence of West Berlin or Viet-Nam.
They are beginning to realize that such independence runs athwart all
Communist ambitions but is in keeping with our own--and that our approach
to their diverse needs is resilient and resourceful, while the Communists
are still relying on ancient doctrines and dogmas.

Nevertheless it is hard for any nation to focus on an external or
subversive threat to its independence when its energies are drained in
daily combat with the forces of poverty and despair. It makes little sense
for us to assail, in speeches and resolutions, the horrors of communism, to
spend $50 billion a year to prevent its military advance--and then to
begrudge spending, largely on American products, less than one-tenth of
that amount to help other nations strengthen their independence and cure
the social chaos in which communism has always thrived.

I am proud--and I think most Americans are proud--of a mutual defense and
assistance program, evolved with bipartisan support in three
administrations, which has, with all its recognized problems, contributed
to the fact that not a single one of the nearly fifty U.N. members to gain
independence since the Second World War has succumbed to Communist
control.

I am proud of a program that has helped to arm and feed and clothe millions
of people who live on the front lines of freedom.

I am especially proud that this country has put forward for the 60's a vast
cooperative effort to achieve economic growth and social progress
throughout the Americas--the Alliance for Progress.

I do not underestimate the difficulties that we face in this mutual effort
among our close neighbors, but the free states of this hemisphere, working
in close collaboration, have begun to make this alliance a living reality.
Today it is feeding one out of every four school age children in Latin
America an extra food ration from our farm surplus. It has distributed 1.5
million school books and is building 17,000 classrooms. It has helped
resettle tens of thousands of farm families on land they can call their
own. It is stimulating our good neighbors to more self-help and
self-reform--fiscal, social, institutional, and land reforms. It is
bringing new housing and hope, new health and dignity, to millions who were
forgotten. The men and women of this hemisphere know that the alliance
cannot succeed if it is only another name for United States handouts--that
it can succeed only as the Latin American nations themselves devote their
best effort to fulfilling its goals.

This story is the same in Africa, in the Middle East, and in Asia. Wherever
nations are willing to help themselves, we stand ready to help them build
new bulwarks of freedom. We are not purchasing votes for the cold war; we
have gone to the aid of imperiled nations, neutrals and allies alike. What
we do ask--and all that we ask--is that our help be used to best advantage,
and that their own efforts not be diverted by needless quarrels with other
independent nations.

Despite all its past achievements, the continued progress of the Mutual
Assistance Program requires a persistent discontent with present
performance. We have been reorganizing this program to make it a more
effective, efficient instrument--and that process will continue this year.

But free world development will still be an uphill struggle. Government aid
can only supplement the role of private investment, trade expansion,
commodity stabilization, and, above all, internal self-improvement. The
processes of growth are gradual--bearing fruit in a decade, not a day. Our
successes will be neither quick nor dramatic. But if these programs were
ever to be ended, our failures in a dozen countries would be sudden and
certain.

Neither money nor technical assistance, however, can be our only weapon
against poverty. In the end, the crucial effort is one of purpose,
requiring the fuel of finance but also a torch of idealism. And nothing
carries the spirit of this American idealism more effectively to the far
corners of the earth than the American Peace Corps.

A year ago, less than 900 Peace Corps volunteers were on the job. A year
from now they will number more than 9,000--men and women, aged 18 to 79,
willing to give 2 years of their lives to helping people in other lands.

There are, in fact, nearly a million Americans serving their country and
the cause of freedom in overseas posts, a record no other people can match.
Surely those of us who stay at home should be glad to help indirectly; by
supporting our aid programs; .by opening our doors to foreign visitors and
diplomats and students; and by proving, day by day, by deed as well as
word, that we are a just and generous people.

                                  VI.

Third, what comfort can we take from the increasing strains and tensions
within the Communist bloc? Here hope must be tempered with caution. For the
Soviet-Chinese disagreement is over means, not ends. A dispute over how
best to bury the free world is no grounds for Western rejoicing.

Nevertheless, while a strain is not a fracture, it is clear that the forces
of diversity are at work inside the Communist camp, despite all the iron
disciplines of regimentation and all the iron dogmatisms of ideology. Marx
is proven wrong once again: for it is the closed Communist societies, not
the free and open societies which carry within themselves the seeds of
internal disintegration.

The disarray of the Communist empire has been heightened by two other
formidable forces. One is the historical force of nationalism--and the
yearning of all men to be free. The other is the gross inefficiency of
their economies. For a closed society is not open to ideas of progress--and
a police state finds that it cannot command the grain to grow.

New nations asked to choose between two competing systems need only compare
conditions in East and West Germany, Eastern and Western Europe, North and
South Viet-Nam. They need only compare the disillusionment of Communist
Cuba with the promise of the Alliance for Progress. And all the world knows
that no successful system builds a wall to keep its people in and freedom
out--and the wall of shame dividing Berlin is a symbol of Communist
failure.

                                 VII.

Finally, what can we do to move from the present pause toward enduring
peace? Again I would counsel caution. I foresee no spectacular reversal in
Communist methods or goals. But if all these trends and developments can
persuade the Soviet Union to walk the path of peace, then let her know that
all free nations will journey with her. But until that choice is made, and
until the world can develop a reliable system of international security,
the free peoples have no choice but to keep their arms nearby.

This country, therefore, continues to require the best defense in the
world--a defense which is suited to the sixties. This means, unfortunately,
a rising defense budget--for there is no substitute for adequate defense,
and no "bargain basement" way of achieving it. It means the expenditure of
more than $15 billion this year on nuclear weapons systems alone, a sum
which is about equal to the combined defense budgets of our European
Allies.

But it also means improved air and missile defenses, improved civil
defense, a strengthened anti-guerrilla capacity and, of prime importance,
more powerful and flexible non-nuclear forces. For threats of massive
retaliation may not deter piecemeal aggression--and a line of destroyers in
a quarantine, or a division of well-equipped men on a border, may be more
useful to our real security than the multiplication of awesome weapons
beyond all rational need.

But our commitment to national safety is not a commitment to expand our
military establishment indefinitely. We do not dismiss disarmament as
merely an idle dream. For we believe that, in the end, it is the only way
to assure the security of all without impairing the interests of any. Nor
do we mistake honorable negotiation for appeasement. While we shall never
weary in the defense of freedom, neither shall we ever abandon the pursuit
of peace.

In this quest, the United Nations requires our full and continued support.
Its value in serving the cause of peace has been shown anew in its role in
the West New Guinea settlement, in its use as a forum for the Cuban crisis,
and in its task of unification in the Congo. Today the United Nations is
primarily the protector of the small and the weak, and a safety valve for
the strong. Tomorrow it can form the framework for a world of law--a world
in which no nation dictates the destiny of another, and in which the vast
resources now devoted to destructive means will serve constructive ends.

In short, let our adversaries choose. If they choose peaceful competition,
they shall have it. If they come to realize that their ambitions cannot
succeed--if they see their "wars of liberation" and subversion will
ultimately fail--if they recognize that there is more security in accepting
inspection than in permitting new nations to master the black arts of
nuclear war--and if they are willing to turn their energies, as we are, to
the great unfinished tasks of our own peoples--then, surely, the areas of
agreement can be very wide indeed: a clear understanding about Berlin,
stability in Southeast Asia, an end to nuclear testing, new checks on
surprise or accidental attack, and, ultimately, general and complete
disarmament.

                                 VIII.

For we seek not the worldwide victory of one nation or system but a
worldwide victory of man. The modern globe is too small, its weapons are
too destructive, and its disorders are too contagious to permit any other
kind of victory.

To achieve this end, the United States will continue to spend a greater
portion of its national production than any other people in the free world.
For 15 years no other free nation has demanded so much of itself. Through
hot wars and cold, through recession and prosperity, through the ages of
the atom and outer space, the American people have never faltered and their
faith has never flagged. If at times our actions seem to make life
difficult for others, it is only because history has made life difficult
for us all.

But difficult days need not be dark. I think these are proud and memorable
days in the cause of peace and freedom. We are proud, for example, of Major
Rudolf Anderson who gave his life over the island of Cuba. We salute
Specialist James Allen Johnson who died on the border of South Korea. We
pay honor to Sergeant Gerald Pendell who was killed in Viet-Nam. They are
among the many who in this century, far from home, have died for our
country. Our task now, and the task of all Americans is to live up to their
commitment.

My friends: I close on a note of hope. We are not lulled by the momentary
calm of the sea or the somewhat clearer skies above. We know the turbulence
that lies below, and the storms that are beyond the horizon this year. But
now the winds of change appear to be blowing more strongly than ever, in
the world of communism as well as our own. For 175 years we have sailed
with those winds at our back, and with the tides of human freedom in our
favor. We steer our ship with hope, as Thomas Jefferson said, "leaving Fear
astern."

Today we still welcome those winds of change--and we have every reason to
believe that our tide is running strong. With thanks to Almighty God for
seeing us through a perilous passage, we ask His help anew in guiding the
"Good Ship Union."
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of the Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

Today marks my first State of the Union address to you, a constitutional
duty as old as our Republic itself.

President Washington began this tradition in 1790 after reminding the
Nation that the destiny of self-government and the "preservation of the
sacred fire of liberty" is "finally staked on the experiment entrusted to
the hands of the American people." For our friends in the press, who place
a high premium on accuracy, let me say: I did not actually hear George
Washington say that. But it is a matter of historic record.

But from this podium, Winston Churchill asked the free world to stand
together against the onslaught of aggression. Franklin Delano Roosevelt
spoke of a day of infamy and summoned a nation to arms. Douglas MacArthur
made an unforgettable farewell to a country he loved and served so well.
Dwight Eisenhower reminded us that peace was purchased only at the price of
strength. And John F. Kennedy spoke of the burden and glory that is
freedom.

When I visited this Chamber last year as a newcomer to Washington, critical
of past policies which I believed had failed, I proposed a new spirit of
partnership between this Congress and this administration and between
Washington and our State and local governments. In forging this new
partnership for America, we could achieve the oldest hopes of our
Republic--prosperity for our nation, peace for the world, and the blessings
of individual liberty for our children and, someday, for all of humanity.

It's my duty to report to you tonight on the progress that we have made in
our relations with other nations, on the foundation we've carefully laid
for our economic recovery, and finally, on a bold and spirited initiative
that I believe can change the face of American government and make it again
the servant of the people.

Seldom have the stakes been higher for America. What we do and say here
will make all the difference to autoworkers in Detroit, lumberjacks in the
Northwest, steelworkers in Steubenville who are in the unemployment lines;
to black teenagers in Newark and Chicago; to hard-pressed farmers and small
businessmen; and to millions of everyday Americans who harbor the simple
wish of a safe and financially secure future for their children. To
understand the state of the Union, we must look not only at where we are
and where we're going but where we've been. The situation at this time last
year was truly ominous.

The last decade has seen a series of recessions. There was a recession in
1970, in 1974, and again in the spring of 1980. Each time, unemployment
increased and inflation soon turned up again. We coined the word
"stagflation" to describe this.

Government's response to these recessions was to pump up the money supply
and increase spending. In the last 6 months of 1980, as an example, the
money supply increased at the fastest rate in postwar history--13 percent.
Inflation remained in double digits, and government spending increased at
an annual rate of 17 percent. Interest rates reached a staggering 21.5
percent. There were 8 million unemployed.

Late in 1981 we sank into the present recession, largely because continued
high interest rates hurt the auto industry and construction. And there was
a drop in productivity, and the already high unemployment increased.

This time, however, things are different. We have an economic program in
place, completely different from the artificial quick fixes of the past. It
calls for a reduction of the rate of increase in government spending, and
already that rate has been cut nearly in half. But reduced spending the
first and smallest phase of a 3-year tax rate reduction designed to
stimulate the economy and create jobs. Already interest rates are down to
15 3/4 percent, but they must still go lower. Inflation is down from 12.4
percent to 8.9, and for the month of December it was running at an
annualized rate of 5.2 percent. If we had not acted as we did, things would
be far worse for all Americans than they are today. Inflation, taxes, and
interest rates would all be higher.

A year ago, Americans' faith in their governmental process was steadily
declining. Six out of 10 Americans were saying they were pessimistic about
their future. A new kind of defeatism was heard. Some said our domestic
problems were uncontrollable, that we had to learn to live with this
seemingly endless cycle of high inflation and high unemployment.

There were also pessimistic predictions about the relationship between our
administration and this Congress. It was said we could never work together.
Well, those predictions were wrong. The record is clear, and I believe that
history will remember this as an era of American renewal, remember this
administration as an administration of change, and remember this Congress
as a Congress of destiny.

Together, we not only cut the increase in government spending nearly in
half, we brought about the largest tax reductions and the most sweeping
changes in our tax structure since the beginning of this century. And
because we indexed future taxes to the rate of inflation, we took away
government's built-in profit on inflation and its hidden incentive to grow
larger at the expense of American workers.

Together, after 50 years of taking power away from the hands of the people
in their States and local communities, we have started returning power and
resources to them.

Together, we have cut the growth of new Federal regulations nearly in half.
In 1981 there were 23,000 fewer pages in the Federal Register, which lists
new regulations, than there were in 1980. By deregulating oil we've come
closer to achieving energy independence and helped bring down the cost of
gasoline and heating fuel.

Together, we have created an effective Federal strike force to combat waste
and fraud in government. In just 6 months it has saved the taxpayers more
than $2 billion, and it's only getting started.

Together we've begun to mobilize the private sector, not to duplicate
wasteful and discredited government programs, but to bring thousands of
Americans into a volunteer effort to help solve many of America's social
problems.

Together we've begun to restore that margin of military safety that ensures
peace. Our country's uniform is being worn once again with pride.

Together we have made a New Beginning, but we have only begun.

No one pretends that the way ahead will be easy. In my Inaugural Address
last year, I warned that the "ills we suffer have come upon us over several
decades. They will not go away in days, weeks, or months, but they will go
away . . . because we as Americans have the capacity now, as we've had it
in the past, to do whatever needs to be done to preserve this last and
greatest bastion of freedom."

The economy will face difficult moments in the months ahead. But the
program for economic recovery that is in place will pull the economy out of
its slump and put us on the road to prosperity and stable growth by the
latter half of this year. And that is why I can report to you tonight that
in the near future the state of the Union and the economy will be
better--much better--if we summon the strength to continue on the course
that we've charted.

And so, the question: If the fundamentals are in place, what now? Well, two
things. First, we must understand what's happening at the moment to the
economy. Our current problems are not the product of the recovery program
that's only just now getting underway, as some would have you believe; they
are the inheritance of decades of tax and tax and spend and spend.

Second, because our economic problems are deeply rooted and will not
respond to quick political fixes, we must stick to our carefully integrated
plan for recovery. That plan is based on four commonsense fundamentals:
continued reduction of the growth in Federal spending; preserving the
individual and business tax reductions that will stimulate saving and
investment; removing unnecessary Federal regulations to spark productivity;
and maintaining a healthy dollar and a stable monetary policy, the latter a
responsibility of the Federal Reserve System.

The only alternative being offered to this economic program is a return to
the policies that gave us a trillion-dollar debt, runaway inflation,
runaway interest rates and unemployment. The doubters would have us turn
back the clock with tax increases that would offset the personal tax rate
reductions already passed by this Congress. Raise present taxes to cut
future deficits, they tell us. Well, I don't believe we should buy that
argument.

There are too many imponderables for anyone to predict deficits or
surpluses several years ahead with any degree of accuracy. The budget in
place, when I took office, had been projected as balanced. It turned out to
have one of the biggest deficits in history. Another example of the
imponderables that can make deficit projections highly questionable--a
change of only one percentage point in unemployment can alter a deficit up
or down by some $25 billion.

As it now stands, our forecast, which we're required by law to make, will
show major deficits starting at less than a hundred billion dollars and
declining, but still too high. More important, we're making progress with
the three keys to reducing deficits: economic growth, lower interest rates,
and spending control. The policies we have in place will reduce the deficit
steadily, surely, and in time, completely.

Higher taxes would not mean lower deficits. If they did, how would we
explain that tax revenues more than doubled just since 1976; yet in that
same 6-year period we ran the largest series of deficits in our history. In
1980 tax revenues increased by $54 billion, and in 1980 we had one of our
all-time biggest deficits. Raising taxes won't balance the budget; it will
encourage more government spending and less private investment. Raising
taxes will slow economic growth, reduce production, and destroy future
jobs, making it more difficult for those without jobs to find them and more
likely that those who now have jobs could lose them. So, I will not ask you
to try to balance the budget on the backs of the American taxpayers.

I will seek no tax increases this year, and I have no intention of
retreating from our basic program of tax relief. I promise to bring the
American people--to bring their tax rates down and to keep them down, to
provide them incentives to rebuild our economy, to save, to invest in
America's future. I will stand by my word. Tonight I'm urging the American
people: Seize these new opportunities to produce, to save, to invest, and
together we'll make this economy a mighty engine of freedom, hope, and
prosperity again.

Now, the budget deficit this year will exceed our earlier expectations. The
recession did that. It lowered revenues and increased costs. To some
extent, we're also victims of our own success. We've brought inflation down
faster than we thought we could, and in doing this, we've deprived
government of those hidden revenues that occur when inflation pushes people
into higher income tax brackets. And the continued high interest rates last
year cost the government about $5 billion more than anticipated.

We must cut out more nonessential government spending and rout out more
waste, and we will continue our efforts to reduce the number of employees
in the Federal work force by 75,000.

The budget plan I submit to you on February 8th will realize major savings
by dismantling the Departments of Energy and Education and by eliminating
ineffective subsidies for business. We'll continue to redirect our
resources to our two highest budget priorities--a strong national defense
to keep America free and at peace and a reliable safety net of social
programs for those who have contributed and those who are in need.

Contrary to some of the wild charges you may have heard, this
administration has not and will not turn its back on America's elderly or
America's poor. Under the new budget, funding for social insurance programs
will be more than double the amount spent only 6 years ago. But it would be
foolish to pretend that these or any programs cannot be made more efficient
and economical.

The entitlement programs that make up our safety net for the truly needy
have worthy goals and many deserving recipients. We will protect them. But
there's only one way to see to it that these programs really help those
whom they were designed to help. And that is to bring their spiraling costs
under control.

Today we face the absurd situation of a Federal budget with three-quarters
of its expenditures routinely referred to as "uncontrollable." And a large
part of this goes to entitlement programs.

Committee after committee of this Congress has heard witness after witness
describe many of these programs as poorly administered and rife with waste
and fraud. Virtually every American who shops in a local supermarket is
aware of the daily abuses that take place in the food stamp program, which
has grown by 16,000 percent in the last 15 years. Another example is
Medicare and Medicaid--programs with worthy goals but whose costs have
increased from 11.2 billion to almost 60 billion, more than 5 times as
much, in just 10 years.

Waste and fraud are serious problems. Back in 1980 Federal investigators
testified before one of your committees that "corruption has permeated
virtually every area of the Medicare and Medicaid health care industry."
One official said many of the people who are cheating the system were "very
confident that nothing was going to happen to them." Well, something is
going to happen. Not only the taxpayers are defrauded; the people with real
dependency on these programs are deprived of what they need, because
available resources are going not to the needy, but to the greedy.

The time has come to control the uncontrollable. In August we made a start.
I signed a bill to reduce the growth of these programs by $44 billion over
the next 3 years while at the same time preserving essential services for
the truly needy. Shortly you will receive from me a message on further
reforms we intend to install--some new, but others long recommended by your
own congressional committees. I ask you to help make these savings for the
American taxpayer.

The savings we propose in entitlement programs will total some $63 billion
over 4 Years and will, without affecting social t security, go a long way
toward bringing Federal spending under control.

But don't be fooled by those who proclaim that spending cuts will deprive
the elderly, the needy, and the helpless. The. Federal Government will
still subsidize 95 million meals every day. That's one out of seven of all
the meals served in America. Head Start, senior nutrition programs, and
child welfare programs will not be cut from the levels we proposed last
year. More than one-half billion dollars has been proposed for minority
business assistance. And research at the National Institute of Health will
be increased by over $100 million. While meeting all these needs, we intend
to plug unwarranted tax loopholes and strengthen the law which requires all
large corporations to pay a minimum tax.

I am confident the economic program we've put into operation will protect
the needy while it triggers a recovery that will benefit all Americans. It
will stimulate the economy, result in increased savings and provide capital
for expansion, mortgages for homebuilding, and jobs for the unemployed.

Now that the essentials of that program are in place, our next major
undertaking must be a program--just as bold, just as innovative--to make
government again accountable to the people, to make our system of
federalism work again.

Our citizens feel they've lost control of even the most basic decisions
made about the essential services of government, such as schools, welfare,
roads, and even garbage collection. And they're right. A maze of
interlocking jurisdictions and levels of government confronts average
citizens in trying to solve even the simplest of problems. They don't know
where to turn for answers, who to hold accountable, who to praise, who to
blame, who to vote for or against. The main reason for this is the
overpowering growth of Federal grants-in-aid programs during the past few
decades.

In 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grant programs, costing
$7 billion. When I took office, there were approximately 500, costing
nearly a hundred billion dollars--13 programs for energy, 36 for pollution
control, 66 for social services, 90 for education. And here in the
Congress, it takes at least 166 committees just to try to keep track of
them.

You know and I know that neither the President nor the Congress can
properly oversee this jungle of grants-in-aid; indeed, the growth of these
grants has led to the distortion in the vital functions of government. As
one Democratic Governor put it recently: The National Government should be
worrying about "arms control, not potholes."

The growth in these Federal programs has--in the words of one
intergovernmental commission--made the Federal Government "more pervasive,
more intrusive, more unmanageable, more ineffective and costly, and above
all, more (un) accountable." Let's solve this problem with a single, bold
stroke: the return of some $47 billion in Federal programs to State and
local government, together with the means to finance them and a transition
period of nearly 10 years to avoid unnecessary disruption.

I will shortly send this Congress a message describing this program. I want
to emphasize, however, that its full details will have been worked out only
after close consultation with congressional, State, and local officials.

Starting in fiscal 1984, the Federal Government will assume full
responsibility for the cost of the rapidly growing Medicaid program to go
along with its existing responsibility for Medicare. As part of a
financially equal swap, the States will simultaneously take full
responsibility for Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps.
This will make welfare less costly and more responsive to genuine need,
because it'll be designed and administered closer to the grass roots and
the people it serves.

In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain
excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to
the 50 States. The total amount flowing into this fund will be $28 billion
a year. Over the next 4 years the States can use this money in either of
two ways. If they want to continue receiving Federal grants in such areas
as transportation, education, and social services, they can use their trust
fund money to pay for the grants. Or to the extent they choose to forgo the
Federal grant programs, they can use their trust fund money on their own
for those or other purposes. There will be a mandatory pass-through of part
of these funds to local governments.

By 1988 the States will be in complete control of over 40 Federal grant
programs. The trust fund will start to phase out, eventually to disappear,
and the excise taxes will be turned over to the States. They can then
preserve, lower, or raise taxes on their own and fund and manage these
programs as they see fit.

In a single stroke we will be accomplishing a realignment that will end
cumbersome administration and spiraling costs at the Federal level while we
ensure these programs will be more responsive to both the people they're
meant to help and the people who pay for them.

Hand in hand with this program to strengthen the discretion and flexibility
of State and local governments, we're proposing legislation for an
experimental effort to improve and develop our depressed urban areas in the
1980's and '90's. This legislation will permit States and localities to
apply to the Federal Government for designation as urban enterprise zones.
A broad range of special economic incentives in the zones will help attract
new business, new jobs, new opportunity to America's inner cities and rural
towns. Some will say our mission is to save free enterprise. Well, I say we
must free enterprise so that together we can save America.

Some will also say our States and local communities are not up to the
challenge of a new and creative partnership. Well, that might have been
true 20 years ago before reforms like reapportionment and the Voting Rights
Act, the 10-year extension of which I strongly support. It's no longer true
today. This administration has faith in State and local governments and the
constitutional balance envisioned by the Founding Fathers. We also believe
in the integrity, decency, and sound, good sense of grass roots Americans.

Our faith in the American people is reflected in another major endeavor.
Our private sector initiatives task force is seeking out successful
community models of school, church, business, union, foundation, and civic
programs that help community needs. Such groups are almost invariably far
more efficient than government in running social programs.

We're not asking them to replace discarded and often discredited government
programs dollar for dollar, service for service. We just want to help them
perform the good works they choose and help others to profit by their
example. Three hundred and eighty-five thousand corporations and private
organizations are already working on social programs ranging from drug
rehabilitation to job training, and thousands more Americans have written
us asking how they can help. The volunteer spirit is still alive and well
in America.

Our nation's long journey towards civil rights for all our citizens--once
a source of discord, now a source of pride--must continue with no
backsliding or slowing down. We must and shall see that those basic laws
that guarantee equal rights are preserved and, when necessary,
strengthened.

Our concern for equal rights for women is firm and unshakable. We launched
a new Task Force on Legal Equity for Women and a Fifty States Project that
will examine State laws for discriminatory language. And for the first time
in our history, a woman sits on the highest court in the land.

So, too, the problem of crime--one as real and deadly serious as any in
America today. It demands that we seek transformation of our legal system,
which overly protects the rights of criminals while it leaves society and
the innocent victims of crime without justice.

We look forward to the enactment of a responsible clean air act to increase
jobs while continuing to improve the quality of our air. We're encouraged
by the bipartisan initiative of the House and are hopeful of further
progress as the Senate continues its deliberations.

So far, I've concentrated largely, now, on domestic matters. To view the
state of the Union in perspective, we must not ignore the rest of the
world. There isn't time tonight for a lengthy treatment of social--or
foreign policy, I should say, a subject I intend to address in detail in
the near future. A few words, however, are in order on the progress we've
made over the past year, reestablishing respect for our nation around the
globe and some of the challenges and goals that we will approach in the
year ahead.

At Ottawa and Cancun, I met with leaders of the major industrial powers and
developing nations. Now, some of those I met with were a little surprised
that I didn't apologize for America's wealth. Instead, I spoke of the
strength of the free marketplace system and how that system could help them
realize their aspirations for economic development and political freedom. I
believe lasting friendships were made, and the foundation was laid for
future cooperation.

In the vital region of the Caribbean Basin, we're developing a program of
aid, trade, and investment incentives to promote self-sustaining growth and
a better, more secure life for our neighbors to the south. Toward those who
would export terrorism and subversion in the Caribbean and elsewhere,
especially Cuba and Libya, we will act with firmness.

Our foreign policy is a policy of strength, fairness, and balance. By
restoring America's military credibility, by pursuing peace at the
negotiating table wherever both sides are willing to sit down in good
faith, and by regaining the respect of America's allies and adversaries
alike, we have strengthened our country's position as a force for peace and
progress in the world.

When action is called for, we're taking it. Our sanctions against the
military dictatorship that has attempted to crush human rights in
Poland--and against the Soviet regime behind that military
dictatorship--clearly demonstrated to the world that America will not
conduct "business as usual" with the forces of oppression. If the events in
Poland continue to deteriorate, further measures will follow.

Now, let me also note that private American groups have taken the lead in
making January 30th a day of solidarity with the people of Poland. So, too,
the European Parliament has called for March 21st to be an international
day of support for Afghanistan. Well, I urge all peace-loving peoples to
join together on those days, to raise their voices, to speak and pray for
freedom.

Meanwhile, we're working for reduction of arms and military activities, as
I announced in my address to the Nation last November 18th. We have
proposed to the Soviet Union a far-reaching agenda for mutual reduction of
military forces and have already initiated negotiations with them in Geneva
on intermediate-range nuclear forces. In those talks it is essential that
we negotiate from a position of strength. There must be a real incentive
for the Soviets to take these talks seriously. This requires that we
rebuild our defenses.

In the last decade, while we sought the moderation of Soviet power through
a process of restraint and accommodation, the Soviets engaged in an
unrelenting buildup of their military forces. The protection of our
national security has required that we undertake a substantial program to
enhance our military forces.

We have not neglected to strengthen our traditional alliances in Europe and
Asia, or to develop key relationships with our partners in the Middle East
and other countries. Building a more peaceful world requires a sound
strategy and the national resolve to back it up. When radical forces
threaten our friends, when economic misfortune creates conditions of
instability, when strategically vital parts of the world fall under the
shadow of Soviet power, our response can make the difference between
peaceful change or disorder and violence. That's why we've laid such stress
not only on our own defense but on our vital foreign assistance program.
Your recent passage of the Foreign Assistance Act sent a signal to the
world that America will not shrink from making the investments necessary
for both peace and security. Our foreign policy must be rooted in realism,
not naivete or self-delusion.

A recognition of what the Soviet empire is about is the starting point.
Winston Churchill, in negotiating with the Soviets, observed that they
respect only strength and resolve in their dealings with other nations.
That's why we've moved to reconstruct our national defenses. We intend to
keep the peace. We will also keep our freedom.

We have made pledges of a new frankness in our public statements and
worldwide broadcasts. In the face of a climate of falsehood and
misinformation, we've promised the world a season of truth--the truth of
our great civilized ideas: individual liberty, representative government,
the rule of law under God. We've never needed walls or minefields or barbed
wire to keep our people in. Nor do we declare martial law to keep our
people from voting for the kind of government they want.

Yes, we have our problems; yes, we're in a time of recession. And it's
true, there's no quick fix, as I said, to instantly end the tragic pain of
unemployment. But we will end it. The process has already begun, and we'll
see its effect as the year goes on.

We speak with pride and admiration of that little band of Americans who
overcame insuperable odds to set this nation on course 200 years ago. But
our glory didn't end with them. Americans ever since have emulated their
deeds.

We don't have to turn to our history books for heroes. They're all around
us. One who sits among you here tonight epitomized that heroism at the end
of the longest imprisonment ever inflicted on men of our Armed Forces. Who
will ever forget that night when we waited for television to bring us the
scene of that first plane landing at Clark Field in the Philippines,
bringing our POW's home? The plane door opened and Jeremiah Denton came
slowly down the ramp. He caught sight of our flag, saluted it, said, "God
bless America," and then thanked us for bringing him home.

Just 2 weeks ago, in the midst of a terrible tragedy on the Potomac, we saw
again the spirit of American heroism at its finest--the heroism of
dedicated rescue workers saving crash victims from icy waters. And we saw
the heroism of one of our young government employees, Lenny Skutnik, who,
when he saw a woman lose her grip on the helicopter line, dived into the
water and dragged her to safety.

And then there are countless, quiet, everyday heroes of American who
sacrifice long and hard so their children will know a better life than
they've known; church and civic volunteers who help to feed, clothe, nurse,
and teach the needy; millions who've made our nation and our nation's
destiny so very special--unsung heroes who may not have realized their own
dreams themselves but then who reinvest those dreams in their children.
Don't let anyone tell you that America's best days are behind her, that the
American spirit has been vanquished. We've seen it triumph too often in our
lives to stop believing in it now.

A hundred and twenty years ago, the greatest of all our Presidents
delivered his second State of the Union message in this Chamber. "We cannot
escape history," Abraham Lincoln warned. "We of this Congress and this
administration will be remembered in spite of ourselves." The "trial
through which we pass will light us down, in honor or dishonor, to the
latest (last) generation."

Well, that President and that Congress did not fail the American people.
Together they weathered the storm and preserved the Union. Let it be said
of us that we, too, did not fail; that we, too, worked together to bring
America through difficult times. Let us so conduct ourselves that two
centuries from now, another Congress and another President, meeting in this
Chamber as we are meeting, will speak of us with pride, saying that we met
the test and preserved for them in their day the sacred flame of
liberty--this last, best hope of man on Earth.

God bless you, and thank you.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9 p.m. in the House Chamber at the Capitol.
He was introduced by Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of
Representatives. The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio
and television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of the Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

This solemn occasion marks the 196th time that a President of the United
States has reported on the State of the Union since George Washington first
did so in 1790. That's a lot of reports, but there's no shortage of new
things to say about the State of the Union. The very key to our success has
been our ability, foremost among nations, to preserve our lasting values by
making change work for us rather than against us.

I would like to talk with you this evening about what we can do
together--not as Republicans and Democrats, but as Americans--to make
tomorrow's America happy and prosperous at home, strong and respected
abroad, and at peace in the world.

As we gather here tonight, the state of our Union is strong, but our
economy is troubled. For too many of our fellow citizens--farmers, steel and
auto workers, lumbermen, black teenagers, working mothers--this is a painful
period. We must all do everything in our power to bring their ordeal to an
end. It has fallen to us, in our time, to undo damage that was a long time
in the making, and to begin the hard but necessary task of building a
better future for ourselves and our children.

We have a long way to go, but thanks to the courage, patience, and strength
of our people, America is on the mend.

But let me give you just one important reason why I believe this--it
involves many members of this body.

Just 10 days ago, after months of debate and deadlock, the bipartisan
Commission on Social Security accomplished the seemingly impossible. Social
security, as some of us had warned for so long, faced disaster. I, myself,
have been talking about this problem for almost 30 years. As 1983 began,
the system stood on the brink of bankruptcy, a double victim of our
economic ills. First, a decade of rampant inflation drained its reserves as
we tried to protect beneficiaries from the spiraling cost of living. Then
the recession and the sudden end of inflation withered the expanding wage
base and increasing revenues the system needs to support the 36 million
Americans who depend on it.

When the Speaker of the House, the Senate majority leader, and I performed
the bipartisan--or formed the bipartisan Commission on Social Security,
pundits and experts predicted that party divisions and conflicting
interests would prevent the Commission from agreeing on a plan to save
social security. Well, sometimes, even here in Washington, the cynics are
wrong. Through compromise and cooperation, the members of the Commission
overcame their differences and achieved a fair, workable plan. They proved
that, when it comes to the national welfare, Americans can still pull
together for the common good.

Tonight, I'm especially pleased to join with the Speaker and the Senate
majority leader in urging the Congress to enact this plan by Easter.

There are elements in it, of course, that none of us prefers, but taken
together it performs a package that all of us can support. It asks for some
sacrifice by all--the self-employed, beneficiaries, workers, government
employees, and the better-off among the retired--but it imposes an undue
burden on none. And, in supporting it, we keep an important pledge to the
American people: The integrity of the social security system will be
preserved, and no one's payments will be reduced.

The Commission's plan will do the job; indeed, it must do the job. We owe
it to today's older Americans and today's younger workers. So, before we go
any further, I ask you to join with me in saluting the members of the
Commission who are here tonight and Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker and
Speaker Tip O'Neill for a job well done. I hope and pray the bipartisan
spirit that guided you in this endeavor will inspire all of us as we face
the challenges of the year ahead.

Nearly half a century ago, in this Chamber, another American President,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his second State of the Union message, urged
America to look to the future, to meet the challenge of change and the need
for leadership that looks forward, not backward.

"Throughout the world," he said, "change is the order of the day. In every
nation economic problems long in the making have brought crises to (of)
many kinds for which the masters of old practice and theory were
unprepared." He also reminded us that "the future lies with those wise
political leaders who realize that the great public is interested more in
Government than in politics."

So, let us, in these next 2 years--men and women of both parties, every
political shade--concentrate on the long-range, bipartisan responsibilities
of government, not the short-range or short-term temptations of partisan
politics.

The problems we inherited were far worse than most inside and out of
government had expected; the recession was deeper than most inside and out
of government had predicted. Curing those problems has taken more time and
a higher toll than any of us wanted. Unemployment is far too high.
Projected Federal spending--if government refuses to tighten its own
belt--will also be far too high and could weaken and shorten the economic
recovery now underway.

This recovery will bring with it a revival of economic confidence and
spending for consumer items and capital goods--the stimulus we need to
restart our stalled economic engines. The American people have already
stepped up their rate of saving, assuring that the funds needed to
modernize our factories and improve our technology will once again flow to
business and industry.

The inflationary expectations that led to a 21 1/2-percent interest prime
rate and soaring mortgage rates 2 years ago are now reduced by almost half.
Leaders have started to realize that double-digit inflation is no longer a
way of life. I misspoke there. I should have said "lenders."

So, interest rates have tumbled, paving the way for recovery in vital
industries like housing and autos.

The early evidence of that recovery has started coming in. Housing starts
for the fourth quarter of 1982 were up 45 percent from a year ago, and
housing permits, a sure indicator of future growth, were up a whopping 60
percent.

We're witnessing an upsurge of productivity and impressive evidence that
American industry will once again become competitive in markets at home and
abroad, ensuring more jobs and better incomes for the Nation's work force.
But our confidence must also be tempered by realism and patience. Quick
fixes and artificial stimulants repeatedly applied over decades are what
brought us the inflationary disorders that we've now paid such a heavy
price to cure.

The permanent recovery in employment, production, and investment we seek
won't come in a sharp, short spurt. It'll build carefully and steadily in
the months and years ahead. In the meantime, the challenge of government is
to identify the things that we can do now to ease the massive economic
transition for the American people.

The Federal budget is both a symptom and a cause of our economic problems.
Unless we reduce the dangerous growth rate in government spending, we could
face the prospect of sluggish economic growth into the indefinite future.
Failure to cope with this problem now could mean as much as a trillion
dollars more in national debt in the next 4 years alone. That would average
$4,300 in additional debt for every man, woman, child, and baby in our
nation.

To assure a sustained recovery, we must continue getting runaway spending
under control to bring those deficits down. If we don't, the recovery will
be too short, unemployment will remain too high, and we will leave an
unconscionable burden of national debt for our children. That we must not
do.

Let's be clear about where the deficit problem comes from. Contrary to the
drumbeat we've been hearing for the last few months, the deficits we face
are not rooted in defense spending. Taken as a percentage of the gross
national product, our defense spending happens to be only about four-fifths
of what it was in 1970. Nor is the deficit, as some would have it, rooted
in tax cuts. Even with our tax cuts, taxes as a fraction of gross national
product remain about the same as they were in 1970. The fact is, our
deficits come from the uncontrolled growth of the budget for domestic
spending.

During the 1970's, the share of our national income devoted to this
domestic spending increased by more than 60 percent, from 10 cents out of
every dollar produced by the American people to 16 cents. In spite of all
our economies and efficiencies, and without adding any new programs, basic,
necessary domestic spending provided for in this year's budget will grow to
almost a trillion dollars over the next 5 years.

The deficit problem is a clear and present danger to the basic health of
our Republic. We need a plan to overcome this danger--a plan based on these
principles. It must be bipartisan. Conquering the deficits and putting the
Government's house in order will require the best effort of all of us. It
must be fair. Just as all will share in the benefits that will come from
recovery, all would share fairly in the burden of transition. It must be
prudent. The strength of our national defense must be restored so that we
can pursue prosperity and peace and freedom while maintaining our
commitment to the truly needy. And finally, it must be realistic. We can't
rely on hope alone.

With these guiding principles in mind, let me outline a four-part plan to
increase economic growth and reduce deficits.

First, in my budget message, I will recommend a Federal spending freeze. I
know this is strong medicine, but so far, we have only cut the rate of
increase in Federal spending. The Government has continued to spend more
money each year, though not as much more as it did in the past. Taken as a
whole, the budget I'm proposing for the fiscal year will increase no more
than the rate of inflation. In other words, the Federal Government will
hold the line on real spending. Now, that's far less than many American
families have had to do in these difficult times.

I will request that the proposed 6-month freeze in cost-of-living
adjustments recommended by the bipartisan Social Security Commission be
applied to other government-related retirement programs. I will, also,
propose a 1-year freeze on a broad range of domestic spending programs, and
for Federal civilian and military pay and pension programs. And let me say
right here, I'm sorry, with regard to the military, in asking that of them,
because for so many years they have been so far behind and so low in reward
for what the men and women in uniform are doing. But I'm sure they will
understand that this must be across the board and fair.

Second, I will ask the Congress to adopt specific measures to control the
growth of the so-called uncontrollable spending programs. These are the
automatic spending programs, such as food stamps, that cannot be simply
frozen and that have grown by over 400 percent since 1970. They are the
largest single cause of the built-in or structural deficit problem. Our
standard here will be fairness, ensuring that the taxpayers' hard-earned
dollars go only to the truly needy; that none of them are turned away, but
that fraud and waste are stamped out. And I'm sorry to say, there's a lot
of it out there. In the food stamp program alone, last year, we identified
almost $1.1 billion in overpayments. The taxpayers aren't the only victims
of this kind of abuse. The truly needy suffer as funds intended for them
are taken not by the needy, but by the greedy. For everyone's sake, we must
put an end to such waste and corruption.

Third, I will adjust our program to restore America's defenses by proposing
$55 billion in defense savings over the next 5 years. These are savings
recommended to me by the Secretary of Defense, who has assured me they can
be safely achieved and will not diminish our ability to negotiate arms
reductions or endanger America's security. We will not gamble with our
national survival.

And fourth, because we must ensure reduction and eventual elimination of
deficits over the next several years, I will propose a standby tax, limited
to no more than 1 percent of the gross national product, to start in fiscal
1986. It would last no more than 3 years, and it would start only if the
Congress has first approved our spending freeze and budget control program.
And there are several other conditions also that must be met, all of them
in order for this program to be triggered.

Now, you could say that this is an insurance policy for the future, a
remedy that will be at hand if needed but only resorted to if absolutely
necessary. In the meantime, we'll continue to study ways to simplify the
tax code and make it more fair for all Americans. This is a goal that every
American who's ever struggled with a tax form can understand.

At the same time, however, I will oppose any efforts to undo the basic tax
reforms that we've already enacted, including the 10-percent tax break
coming to taxpayers this July and the tax indexing which will protect all
Americans from inflationary bracket creep in the years ahead.

Now, I realize that this four-part plan is easier to describe than it will
be to enact. But the looming deficits that hang over us and over America's
future must be reduced. The path I've outlined is fair, balanced, and
realistic. If enacted, it will ensure a steady decline in deficits, aiming
toward a balanced budget by the end of the decade. It's the only path that
will lead to a strong, sustained recovery. Let us follow that path
together.

No domestic challenge is more crucial than providing stable, permanent jobs
for all Americans who want to work. The recovery program will provide jobs
for most, but others will need special help and training for new skills.
Shortly, I will submit to the Congress the Employment Act of 1983, designed
to get at the special problems of the long-term unemployed, as well as
young people trying to enter the job market. I'll propose extending
unemployment benefits, including special incentives to employers who hire
the long-term unemployed, providing programs for displaced workers, and
helping federally funded and State-administered unemployment insurance
programs provide workers with training and relocation assistance. Finally,
our proposal will include new incentives for summer youth employment to
help young people get a start in the job market.

We must offer both short-term help and long-term hope for our unemployed. I
hope we can work together on this. I hope we can work together as we did
last year in enacting the landmark Job Training Partnership Act. Regulatory
reform legislation, a responsible clean air act, and passage of enterprise
zone legislation will also create new incentives for jobs and opportunity.

One of out of every five jobs in our country depends on trade. So, I will
propose a broader strategy in the field of international trade--one that
increases the openness of our trading system and is fairer to America's
farmers and workers in the world marketplace. We must have adequate export
financing to sell American products overseas. I will ask for new
negotiating authority to remove barriers and to get more of our products
into foreign markets. We must strengthen the organization of our trade
agencies and make changes in our domestic laws and international trade
policy to promote free trade and the increased flow of American goods,
services, and investments.

Our trade position can also be improved by making our port system more
efficient. Better, more active harbors translate into stable jobs in our
coalfields, railroads, trucking industry, and ports. After 2 years of
debate, it's time for us to get together and enact a port modernization
bill.

Education, training, and retraining are fundamental to our success as are
research and development and productivity. Labor, management, and
government at all levels can and must participate in improving these tools
of growth. Tax policy, regulatory practices, and government programs all
need constant reevaluation in terms of our competitiveness. Every American
has a role and a stake in international trade.

We Americans are still the technological leaders in most fields. We must
keep that edge, and to do so we need to begin renewing the basics--starting
with our educational system. While we grew complacent, others have acted.
Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours, graduates from
its universities more engineers than we do. If a child doesn't receive
adequate math and science teaching by the age of 16, he or she has lost the
chance to be a scientist or an engineer. We must join together--parents,
teachers, grass roots groups, organized labor, and the business
community--to revitalize American education by setting a standard of
excellence.

In 1983 we seek four major education goals: a quality education initiative
to encourage a substantial upgrading of math and science instruction
through block grants to the States; establishment of education savings
accounts that will give middle and lower-income families an incentive to
save for their children's college education and, at the same time,
encourage a real increase in savings for economic growth; passage of
tuition tax credits for parents who want to send their children to private
or religiously affiliated schools; a constitutional amendment to permit
voluntary school prayer. God should never have been expelled from America's
classrooms in the first place.

Our commitment to fairness means that we must assure legal and economic
equity for women, and eliminate, once and for all, all traces of unjust
discrimination against women from the United States Code. We will not
tolerate wage discrimination based on sex, and we intend to strengthen
enforcement of child support laws to ensure that single parents, most of
whom are women, do not suffer unfair financial hardship. We will also take
action to remedy inequities in pensions. These initiatives will be joined
by others to continue our efforts to promote equity for women.

Also in the area of fairness and equity, we will ask for extension of the
Civil Rights Commission, which is due to expire this year. The Commission
is an important part of the ongoing struggle for justice in America, and we
strongly support its reauthorization. Effective enforcement of our nation's
fair housing laws is also essential to ensuring equal opportunity. In the
year ahead, we'll work to strengthen enforcement of fair housing laws for
all Americans.

The time has also come for major reform of our criminal justice statutes
and acceleration of the drive against organized crime and drug trafficking.
It's high time that we make our cities safe again. This administration
hereby declares an all-out war on big-time organized crime and the drug
racketeers who are poisoning our young people. We will also implement
recommendations of our Task Force on Victims of Crime, which will report to
me this week.

American agriculture, the envy of the world, has become the victim of its
own successes. With one farmer now producing enough food to feed himself
and 77 other people, America is confronted with record surplus crops and
commodity prices below the cost of production. We must strive, through
innovations like the payment-in-kind crop swap approach and an aggressive
export policy, to restore health and vitality to rural America. Meanwhile,
I have instructed the Department of Agriculture to work individually with
farmers with debt problems to help them through these tough times.

Over the past year, our Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives has
successfully forged a working partnership involving leaders of business,
labor, education, and government to address the training needs of American
workers. Thanks to the Task Force, private sector initiatives are now
underway in all 50 States of the Union, and thousands of working people
have been helped in making the shift from dead-end jobs and low-demand
skills to the growth areas of high technology and the service economy.
Additionally, a major effort will be focused on encouraging the expansion
of private community child care. The new advisory council on private sector
initiatives will carry on and extend this vital work of encouraging private
initiative in 1983.

In the coming year, we will also act to improve the quality of life for
Americans by curbing the skyrocketing cost of health care that is becoming
an unbearable financial burden for so many. And we will submit legislation
to provide catastrophic illness insurance coverage for older Americans.

I will also shortly submit a comprehensive federalism proposal that will
continue our efforts to restore to States and local governments their roles
as dynamic laboratories of change in a creative society.

During the next several weeks, I will send to the Congress a series of
detailed proposals on these and other topics and look forward to working
with you on the development of these initiatives.

So far, now, I've concentrated mainly on the problems posed by the future.
But in almost every home and workplace in America, we're already witnessing
reason for great hope--the first flowering of the manmade miracles of high
technology, a field pioneered and still led by our country.

To many of us now, computers, silicon chips, data processing, cybernetics,
and all the other innovations of the dawning high technology age are as
mystifying as the workings of the combustion engine must have been when
that first Model T rattled down Main Street, U.S.A. But as surely as
America's pioneer spirit made us the industrial giant of the 20th century,
the same pioneer spirit today is opening up on another vast front of
opportunity, the frontier of high technology.

In conquering the frontier we cannot write off our traditional industries,
but we must develop the skills and industries that will make us a pioneer
of tomorrow. This administration is committed to keeping America the
technological leader of the world now and into the 21st century.

But let us turn briefly to the international arena. America's leadership in
the world came to us because of our own strength and because of the values
which guide us as a society: free elections, a free press, freedom of
religious choice, free trade unions, and above all, freedom for the
individual and rejection of the arbitrary power of the state. These values
are the bedrock of our strength. They unite us in a stewardship of peace
and freedom with our allies and friends in NATO, in Asia, in Latin America,
and elsewhere. They are also the values which in the recent past some among
us had begun to doubt and view with a cynical eye.

Fortunately, we and our allies have rediscovered the strength of our common
democratic values, and we're applying them as a cornerstone of a
comprehensive strategy for peace with freedom. In London last year, I
announced the commitment of the United States to developing the
infrastructure of democracy throughout the world. We intend to pursue this
democratic initiative vigorously. The future belongs not to governments and
ideologies which oppress their peoples, but to democratic systems of
self-government which encourage individual initiative and guarantee
personal freedom.

But our strategy for peace with freedom must also be based on
strength--economic strength and military strength. A strong American
economy is essential to the well-being and security of our friends and
allies. The restoration of a strong, healthy American economy has been and
remains one of the central pillars of our foreign policy. The progress I've
been able to report to you tonight will, I know, be as warmly welcomed by
the rest of the world as it is by the American people.

We must also recognize that our own economic well-being is inextricably
linked to the world economy. We export over 20 percent of our industrial
production, and 40 percent of our farmland produces for export. We will
continue to work closely with the industrialized democracies of Europe and
Japan and with the International Monetary Fund to ensure it has adequate
resources to help bring the world economy back to strong, noninflationary
growth.

As the leader of the West and as a country that has become great and rich
because of economic freedom, America must be an unrelenting advocate of
free trade. As some nations are tempted to turn to protectionism, our
strategy cannot be to follow them, but to lead the way toward freer trade.
To this end, in May of this year America will host an economic summit
meeting in Williamsburg, Virginia.

As we begin our third year, we have put in place a defense program that
redeems the neglect of the past decade. We have developed a realistic
military strategy to deter threats to peace and to protect freedom if
deterrence fails. Our Armed Forces are finally properly paid; after years
of neglect are well trained and becoming better equipped and supplied. And
the American uniform is once again worn with pride. Most of the major
systems needed for modernizing our defenses are already underway, and we
will be addressing one key system, the MX missile, in consultation with the
Congress in a few months.

America's foreign policy is once again based on bipartisanship, on realism,
strength, full partnership, in consultation with our allies, and
constructive negotiation with potential adversaries. From the Middle East
to southern Africa to Geneva, American diplomats are taking the initiative
to make peace and lower arms levels. We should be proud of our role as
peacemakers.

In the Middle East last year, the United States played the major role in
ending the tragic fighting in Lebanon and negotiated the withdrawal of the
PLO from Beirut.

Last September, I outlined principles to carry on the peace process begun
so promisingly at Camp David. All the people of the Middle East should know
that in the year ahead we will not flag in our efforts to build on that
foundation to bring them the blessings of peace.

In Central America and the Caribbean Basin, we are likewise engaged in a
partnership for peace, prosperity, and democracy. Final passage of the
remaining portions of our Caribbean Basin Initiative, which passed the
House last year, is one of this administration's top legislative priorities
for 1983.

The security and economic assistance policies of this administration in
Latin America and elsewhere are based on realism and represent a critical
investment in the future of the human race. This undertaking is a joint
responsibility of the executive and legislative branches, and I'm counting
on the cooperation and statesmanship of the Congress to help us meet this
essential foreign policy goal.

At the heart of our strategy for peace is our relationship with the Soviet
Union. The past year saw a change in Soviet leadership. We're prepared for
a positive change in Soviet-American relations. But the Soviet Union must
show by deeds as well as words a sincere commitment to respect the rights
and sovereignty of the family of nations. Responsible members of the world
community do not threaten or invade their neighbors. And they restrain
their allies from aggression.

For our part, we're vigorously pursuing arms reduction negotiations with
the Soviet Union. Supported by our allies, we've put forward draft
agreements proposing significant weapon reductions to equal and verifiable
lower levels. We insist on an equal balance of forces. And given the
overwhelming evidence of Soviet violations of international treaties
concerning chemical and biological weapons, we also insist that any
agreement we sign can and will be verifiable.

In the case of intermediate-range nuclear forces, we have proposed the
complete elimination of the entire class of land-based missiles. We're also
prepared to carefully explore serious Soviet proposals. At the same time,
let me emphasize that allied steadfastness remains a key to achieving arms
reductions.

With firmness and dedication, we'll continue to negotiate. Deep down, the
Soviets must know it's in their interest as well as ours to prevent a
wasteful arms race. And once they recognize our unshakable resolve to
maintain adequate deterrence, they will have every reason to join us in the
search for greater security and major arms reductions. When that moment
comes--and I'm confident that it will--we will have taken an important step
toward a more peaceful future for all the world's people.

A very wise man, Bernard Baruch, once said that America has never forgotten
the nobler things that brought her into being and that light her path. Our
country is a special place, because we Americans have always been
sustained, through good times and bad, by a noble vision--a vision not only
of what the world around us is today but what we as a free people can make
it be tomorrow.

We're realists; we solve our problems instead of ignoring them, no matter
how loud the chorus of despair around us. But we're also idealists, for it
was an ideal that brought our ancestors to these shores from every corner
of the world.

Right now we need both realism and idealism. Millions of our neighbors are
without work. It is up to us to see they aren't without hope. This is a
task for all of us. And may I say, Americans have rallied to this cause,
proving once again that we are the most generous people on Earth.

We who are in government must take the lead in restoring the economy. And
here all that time, I thought you were reading the paper.

The single thing--the single thing that can start the wheels of industry
turning again is further reduction of interest rates. Just another 1 or 2
points can mean tens of thousands of jobs.

Right now, with inflation as low as it is, 3.9 percent, there is room for
interest rates to come down. Only fear prevents their reduction. A lender,
as we know, must charge an interest rate that recovers the depreciated
value of the dollars loaned. And that depreciation is, of course, the
amount of inflation. Today, interest rates are based on fear--fear that
government will resort to measures, as it has in the past, that will send
inflation zooming again.

We who serve here in this Capital must erase that fear by making it
absolutely clear that we will not stop fighting inflation; that, together,
we will do only those things that will lead to lasting economic growth.

Yes, the problems confronting us are large and forbidding. And, certainly,
no one can or should minimize the plight of millions of our friends and
neighbors who are living in the bleak emptiness of unemployment. But we
must and can give them good reason to be hopeful.

Back over the years, citizens like ourselves have gathered within these
walls when our nation was threatened; sometimes when its very existence was
at stake. Always with courage and common sense, they met the crises of
their time and lived to see a stronger, better, and more prosperous
country. The present situation is no worse and, in fact, is not as bad as
some of those they faced. Time and again, they proved that there is nothing
we Americans cannot achieve as free men and women.

Yes, we still have problems--plenty of them. But it's just plain
wrong--unjust to our country and unjust to our people--to let those
problems stand in the way of the most important truth of all: America is on
the mend.

We owe it to the unfortunate to be aware of their plight and to help them
in every way we can. No one can quarrel with that. We must and do have
compassion for all the victims of this economic crisis. But the big story
about America today is the way that millions of confident, caring
people--those extraordinary "ordinary" Americans who never make the
headlines and will never be interviewed--are laying the foundation, not
just for recovery from our present problems but for a better tomorrow for
all our people.

From coast to coast, on the job and in classrooms and laboratories, at new
construction sites and in churches and community groups, neighbors are
helping neighbors. And they've already begun the building, the research,
the work, and the giving that will make our country great again.

I believe this, because I believe in them--in the strength of their hearts
and minds, in the commitment that each one of them brings to their daily
lives, be they high or humble. The challenge for us in government is to be
worthy of them--to make government a help, not a hindrance to our people in
the challenging but promising days ahead.

If we do that, if we care what our children and our children's children
will say of us, if we want them one day to be thankful for what we did here
in these temples of freedom, we will work together to make America better
for our having been here--not just in this year or this decade but in the
next century and beyond.

Thank you, and God bless you.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9:03 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of
Representatives. The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio
and television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of the Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

Once again, in keeping with time-honored tradition, I have come to report
to you on the state of the Union, and I'm pleased to report that America is
much improved, and there's good reason to believe that improvement will
continue through the days to come.

You and I have had some honest and open differences in the year past. But
they didn't keep us from joining hands in bipartisan cooperation to stop a
long decline that had drained this nation's spirit and eroded its health.
There is renewed energy and optimism throughout the land. America is back,
standing tall, looking to the eighties with courage, confidence, and hope.

The problems we're overcoming are not the heritage of one person, party, or
even one generation. It's just the tendency of government to grow, for
practices and programs to become the nearest thing to eternal life we'll
ever see on this Earth. And there's always that well-intentioned chorus of
voices saying, "With a little more power and a little more money, we could
do so much for the people." For a time we forgot the American dream isn't
one of making government bigger; it's keeping faith with the mighty spirit
of free people under God.

As we came to the decade of the eighties, we faced the worst crisis in our
postwar history. In the seventies were years of rising problems and falling
confidence. There was a feeling government had grown beyond the consent of
the governed. Families felt helpless in the face of mounting inflation and
the indignity of taxes that reduced reward for hard work, thrift, and
risktaking. All this was overlaid by an evergrowing web of rules and
regulations.

On the international scene, we had an uncomfortable feeling that we'd lost
the respect of friend and foe. Some questioned whether we had the will to
defend peace and freedom. But America is too great for small dreams. There
was a hunger in the land for a spiritual revival; if you will, a crusade
for renewal. The American people said: Let us look to the future with
confidence, both at home and abroad. Let us give freedom a chance.

Americans were ready to make a new beginning, and together we have done it.
We're confronting our problems one by one. Hope is alive tonight for
millions of young families and senior citizens set free from unfair tax
increases and crushing inflation. Inflation has been beaten down from 12.4
to 3.2 percent, and that's a great victory for all the people. The prime
rate has been cut almost in half, and we must work together to bring it
down even more.

Together, we passed the first across-the-board tax reduction for everyone
since the Kennedy tax cuts. Next year, tax rates will be indexed so
inflation can't push people into higher brackets when they get
cost-of-living pay raises. Government must never again use inflation to
profit at the people's expense.

Today a working family earning $25,000 has $1,100 more in purchasing power
than if tax and inflation rates were still at the 1980 levels. Real
after-tax income increased 5 percent last year. And economic deregulation
of key industries like transportation has offered more chances--or
choices, I should say, to consumers and new changes--or chances for
entrepreneurs and protecting safety. Tonight, we can report and be proud of
one of the best recoveries in decades. Send away the handwringers and the
doubting Thomases. Hope is reborn for couples dreaming of owning homes and
for risktakers with vision to create tomorrow's opportunities.

The spirit of enterprise is sparked by the sunrise industries of high-tech
and by small business people with big ideas--people like Barbara Proctor,
who rose from a ghetto to build a multimillion-dollar advertising agency in
Chicago; Carlos Perez, a Cuban refugee, who turned $27 and a dream into a
successful importing business in Coral Gables, Florida.

People like these are heroes for the eighties. They helped 4 million
Americans find jobs in 1983. More people are drawing paychecks tonight than
ever before. And Congress helps--or progress helps everyone--well, Congress
does too----everyone. In 1983 women filled 73 percent of all the new jobs
in managerial, professional, and technical fields.

But we know that many of our fellow countrymen are still out of work,
wondering what will come of their hopes and dreams. Can we love America and
not reach out to tell them: You are not forgotten; we will not rest until
each of you can reach as high as your God-given talents will take you.

The heart of America is strong; it's good and true. The cynics were wrong;
America never was a sick society. We're seeing rededication to bedrock
values of faith, family, work, neighborhood, peace, and freedom--values
that help bring us together as one people, from the youngest child to the
most senior citizen.

The Congress deserves America's thanks for helping us restore pride and
credibility to our military. And I hope that you're as proud as I am of the
young men and women in uniform who have volunteered to man the ramparts in
defense of freedom and whose dedication, valor, and skill increases so much
our chance of living in a world at peace.

People everywhere hunger for peace and a better life. The tide of the
future is a freedom tide, and our struggle for democracy cannot and will
not be denied. This nation champions peace that enshrines liberty,
democratic rights, and dignity for every individual. America's new
strength, confidence, and purpose are carrying hope and opportunity far
from our shores. A world economic recovery is underway. It began here.

We've journeyed far, but we have much farther to go. Franklin Roosevelt
told us 50 years ago this month: "Civilization can not go back;
civilization must not stand still. We have undertaken new methods. It is
our task to perfect, to improve, to alter when necessary, but in all cases
to go forward."

It's time to move forward again, time for America to take freedom's next
step. Let us unite tonight behind four great goals to keep America free,
secure, and at peace in the eighties together.

We can ensure steady economic growth. We can develop America's next
frontier. We can strengthen our traditional values. And we can build a
meaningful peace to protect our loved ones and this shining star of faith
that has guided millions from tyranny to the safe harbor of freedom,
progress, and hope.

Doing these things will open wider the gates of opportunity, provide
greater security for all, with no barriers of bigotry or discrimination.

The key to a dynamic decade is vigorous economic growth, our first great
goal. We might well begin with common sense in Federal budgeting:
government spending no more than government takes in.

We must bring Federal deficits down. But how we do that makes all the
difference.

We can begin by limiting the size and scope of government. Under the
leadership of Vice President Bush, we have reduced the growth of Federal
regulations by more than 25 percent and cut well over 300 million hours of
government-required paperwork each year. This will save the public more
than $150 billion over the next 10 years.

The Grace commission has given us some 2,500 recommendations for reducing
wasteful spending, and they're being examined throughout the
administration. Federal spending growth has been cut from 17.4 percent in
1980 to less than half of that today, and we have already achieved over
$300 billion in budget savings for the period of 1982 to '86. But that's
only a little more than half of what we sought. Government is still
spending too large a percentage of the total economy.

Now, some insist that any further budget savings must be obtained by
reducing the portion spent on defense. This ignores the fact that national
defense is solely the responsibility of the Federal Government; indeed, it
is its prime responsibility. And yet defense spending is less than a third
of the total budget. During the years of President Kennedy and of the years
before that, defense was almost half the total budget. And then came
several years in which our military capability was allowed to deteriorate
to a very dangerous degree. We are just now restoring, through the
essential modernization of our conventional and strategic forces, our
capability to meet our present and future security needs. We dare not shirk
our responsibility to keep America free, secure, and at peace.

The last decade saw domestic spending surge literally out of control. But
the basis for such spending had been laid in previous years. A pattern of
overspending has been in place for half a century. As the national debt
grew, we were told not to worry, that we owed it to ourselves.

Now we know that deficits are a cause for worry. But there's a difference
of opinion as to whether taxes should be increased, spending cut, or some
of both. Fear is expressed that government borrowing to fund the deficit
could inhibit the economic recovery by taking capital needed for business
and industrial expansion. Well, I think that debate is missing an important
point. Whether government borrows or increases taxes, it will be taking the
same amount of money from the private sector, and, either way, that's too
much. Simple fairness dictates that government must not raise taxes on
families struggling to pay their bills. The root of the problem is that
government's share is more than we can afford if we're to have a sound
economy.

We must bring down the deficits to ensure continued economic growth. In the
budget that I will submit on February 1st, I will recommend measures that
will reduce the deficit over the next 5 years. Many of these will be
unfinished business from last year's budget.

Some could be enacted quickly if we could join in a serious effort to
address this problem. I spoke today with Speaker of the House O'Neill,
Senate Majority Leader Baker, Senate Minority Leader Byrd, and House
Minority Leader Michel. I asked them if they would designate congressional
representatives to meet with representatives of the administration to try
to reach prompt agreement on a bipartisan deficit reduction plan. I know it
would take a long, hard struggle to agree on a full-scale plan. So, what I
have proposed is that we first see if we can agree on a down payment.

Now, I believe there is basis for such an agreement, one that could reduce
the deficits by about a hundred billion dollars over the next 3 years. We
could focus on some of the less contentious spending cuts that are still
pending before the Congress. These could be combined with measures to close
certain tax loopholes, measures that the Treasury Department has previously
said to be worthy of support. In addition, we could examine the possibility
of achieving further outlay savings based on the work of the Grace
commission.

If the congressional leadership is willing, my representatives will be
prepared to meet with theirs at the earliest possible time. I would hope
the leadership might agree on an expedited timetable in which to develop
and enact that down payment.

But a down payment alone is not enough to break us out of the deficit
problem. It could help us start on the right path. Yet, we must do more.
So, I propose that we begin exploring how together we can make structural
reforms to curb the built-in growth of spending.

I also propose improvements in the budgeting process. Some 43 of our 50
States grant their Governors the right to veto individual items in
appropriation bills without having to veto the entire bill. California is
one of those 43 States. As Governor, I found this line-item veto was a
powerful tool against wasteful or extravagant spending. It works in 43
States. Let's put it to work in Washington for all the people.

It would be most effective if done by constitutional amendment. The
majority of Americans approve of such an amendment, just as they and I
approve of an amendment mandating a balanced Federal budget. Many States
also have this protection in their constitutions.

To talk of meeting the present situation by increasing taxes is a Band-Aid
solution which does nothing to cure an illness that's been coming on for
half a century--to say nothing of the fact that it poses a real threat to
economic recovery. Let's remember that a substantial amount of income tax
is presently owed and not paid by people in the underground economy. It
would be immoral to make those who are paying taxes pay more to compensate
for those who aren't paying their share.

There's a better way. Let us go forward with an historic reform for
fairness, simplicity, and incentives for growth. I am asking Secretary Don
Regan for a plan for action to simplify the entire tax code, so all
taxpayers, big and small, are treated more fairly. And I believe such a
plan could result in that underground economy being brought into the
sunlight of honest tax compliance. And it could make the tax base broader,
so personal tax rates could come down, not go up. I've asked that specific
recommendations, consistent with those objectives, be presented to me by
December 1984.

Our second great goal is to build on America's pioneer spirit--I said
something funny? I said America's next frontier--and that's to develop that
frontier. A sparkling economy spurs initiatives, sunrise industries, and
makes older ones more competitive.

Nowhere is this more important than our next frontier: space. Nowhere do we
so effectively demonstrate our technological leadership and ability to make
life better on Earth. The Space Age is barely a quarter of a century old.
But already we've pushed civilization forward with our advances in science
and technology. Opportunities and jobs will multiply as we cross new
thresholds of knowledge and reach deeper into the unknown.

Our progress in space--taking giant steps for all mankind--is a tribute to
American teamwork and excellence. Our finest minds in government, industry,
and academia have all pulled together. And we can be proud to say: We are
first; we are the best; and we are so because we're free.

America has always been greatest when we dared to be great. We can reach
for greatness again. We can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and
working in space for peaceful, economic, and scientific gain. Tonight, I am
directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it
within a decade.

A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science,
communications, in metals, and in lifesaving medicines which could be
manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these
challenges and share in their benefits. NASA will invite other countries to
participate so we can strengthen peace, build prosperity, and expand
freedom for all who share our goals.

Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee
traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today. The market for
space transportation could surpass our capacity to develop it. Companies
interested in putting payloads into space must have ready access to private
sector launch services. The Department of Transportation will help an
expendable launch services industry to get off the ground. We'll soon
implement a number of executive initiatives, develop proposals to ease
regulatory constraints, and, with NASA's help, promote private sector
investment in space.

And as we develop the frontier of space, let us remember our responsibility
to preserve our older resources here on Earth. Preservation of our
environment is not a liberal or conservative challenge, it's common sense.

Though this is a time of budget constraints, I have requested for EPA one
of the largest percentage budget increases of any agency. We will begin the
long, necessary effort to clean up a productive recreational area and a
special national resource--the Chesapeake Bay.

To reduce the threat posed by abandoned hazardous waste dumps, EPA will
spend $410 million. And I will request a supplemental increase of 50
million. And because the Superfund law expires in 1985, I've asked Bill
Ruckelshaus to develop a proposal for its extension so there'll be
additional time to complete this important task.

On the question of acid rain, which concerns people in many areas of the
United States and Canada, I'm proposing a research program that doubles our
current funding. And we'll take additional action to restore our lakes and
develop new technology to reduce pollution that causes acid rain.

We have greatly improved the conditions of our natural resources. We'll ask
the Congress for $157 million beginning in 1985 to acquire new park and
conservation lands. The Department of the Interior will encourage careful,
selective exploration and production on our vital resources in an Exclusive
Economic Zone within the 200-mile limit off our coasts--but with strict
adherence to environmental laws and with fuller State and public
participation.

But our most precious resources, our greatest hope for the future, are the
minds and hearts of our people, especially our children. We can help them
build tomorrow by strengthening our community of shared values. This must
be our third great goal. For us, faith, work, family, neighborhood,
freedom, and peace are not just words; they're expressions of what America
means, definitions of what makes us a good and loving people.

Families stand at the center of our society. And every family has a
personal stake in promoting excellence in education. Excellence does not
begin in Washington. A 600-percent increase in Federal spending on
education between 1960 and 1980 was accompanied by a steady decline in
Scholastic Aptitude Test scores. Excellence must begin in our homes and
neighborhood schools, where it's the responsibility of every parent and
teacher and the right of every child.

Our children come first, and that's why I established a bipartisan National
Commission on Excellence in Education, to help us chart a commonsense
course for better education. And already, communities are implementing the
Commission's recommendations. Schools are reporting progress in math and
reading skills. But we must do more to restore discipline to schools; and
we must encourage the teaching of new basics, reward teachers of merit,
enforce tougher standards, and put our parents back in charge.

I will continue to press for tuition tax credits to expand opportunities
for families and to soften the double payment for those paying public
school taxes and private school tuition. Our proposal would target
assistance to low- and middle-income families. Just as more incentives are
needed within our schools, greater competition is needed among our schools.
Without standards and competition, there can be no champions, no records
broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.

And while I'm on this subject, each day your Members observe a 200-year-old
tradition meant to signify America is one nation under God. I must ask: If
you can begin your day with a member of the clergy standing right here
leading you in prayer, then why can't freedom to acknowledge God be enjoyed
again by children in every schoolroom across this land?

America was founded by people who believed that God was their rock of
safety. He is ours. I recognize we must be cautious in claiming that God is
on our side, but I think it's all right to keep asking if we're on His
side.

During our first 3 years, we have joined bipartisan efforts to restore
protection of the law to unborn children. Now, I know this issue is very
controversial. But unless and until it can be proven that an unborn child
is not a living human being, can we justify assuming without proof that it
isn't? No one has yet offered such proof; indeed, all the evidence is to
the contrary. We should rise above bitterness and reproach, and if
Americans could come together in a spirit of understanding and helping,
then we could find positive solutions to the tragedy of abortion.

Economic recovery, better education, rededication to values, all show the
spirit of renewal gaining the upper hand. And all will improve family life
in the eighties. But families need more. They need assurance that they and
their loved ones can walk the streets of America without being afraid.
Parents need to know their children will not be victims of child
pornography and abduction. This year we will intensify our drive against
these and other horrible crimes like sexual abuse and family violence.

Already our efforts to crack down on career criminals, organized crime,
drugpushers, and to enforce tougher sentences and paroles are having
effect. In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, the biggest decline
since 1972. Protecting victims is just as important as safeguarding the
rights of defendants.

Opportunities for all Americans will increase if we move forward in fair
housing and work to ensure women's rights, provide for equitable treatment
in pension benefits and Individual Retirement Accounts, facilitate child
care, and enforce delinquent parent support payments.

It's not just the home but the workplace and community that sustain our
values and shape our future. So, I ask your help in assisting more
communities to break the bondage of dependency. Help us to free enterprise
by permitting debate and voting "yes" on our proposal for enterprise zones
in America. This has been before you for 2 years. Its passage can help
high-unemployment areas by creating jobs and restoring neighborhoods.

A society bursting with opportunities, reaching for its future with
confidence, sustained by faith, fair play, and a conviction that good and
courageous people will flourish when they're free--these are the secrets of
a strong and prosperous America at peace with itself and the world.

A lasting and meaningful peace is our fourth great goal. It is our highest
aspiration. And our record is clear: Americans resort to force only when we
must. We have never been aggressors. We have always struggled to defend
freedom and democracy.

We have no territorial ambitions. We occupy no countries. We build no walls
to lock people in. Americans build the future. And our vision of a better
life for farmers, merchants, and working people, from the Americas to Asia,
begins with a simple premise: The future is best decided by ballots, not
bullets.

Governments which rest upon the consent of the governed do not wage war on
their neighbors. Only when people are given a personal stake in deciding
their own destiny, benefiting from their own risks, do they create
societies that are prosperous, progressive, and free. Tonight, it is
democracies that offer hope by feeding the hungry, prolonging life, and
eliminating drudgery.

When it comes to keeping America strong, free, and at peace, there should
be no Republicans or Democrats, just patriotic Americans. We can decide the
tough issues not by who is right, but by what is right.

Together, we can continue to advance our agenda for peace. We can establish
a more stable basis for peaceful relations with the Soviet Union;
strengthen allied relations across the board; achieve real and equitable
reductions in the levels of nuclear arms; reinforce our peacemaking efforts
in the Middle East, Central America, and southern Africa; or assist
developing countries, particularly our neighbors in the Western Hemisphere;
and assist in the development of democratic institutions throughout the
world.

The wisdom of our bipartisan cooperation was seen in the work of the
Scowcroft commission, which strengthened our ability to deter war and
protect peace. In that same spirit, I urge you to move forward with the
Henry Jackson plan to implement the recommendations of the Bipartisan
Commission on Central America.

Your joint resolution on the multinational peacekeeping force in Lebanon is
also serving the cause of peace. We are making progress in Lebanon. For
nearly 10 years, the Lebanese have lived from tragedy to tragedy with no
hope for their future. Now the multinational peacekeeping force and our
marines are helping them break their cycle of despair. There is hope for a
free, independent, and sovereign Lebanon. We must have the courage to give
peace a chance. And we must not be driven from our objectives for peace in
Lebanon by state-sponsored terrorism. We have seen this ugly specter in
Beirut, Kuwait, and Rangoon. It demands international attention. I will
forward shortly legislative proposals to help combat terrorism. And I will
be seeking support from our allies for concerted action.

Our NATO alliance is strong. 1983 was a banner year for political courage.
And we have strengthened our partnerships and our friendships in the Far
East. We're committed to dialog, deterrence, and promoting prosperity.
We'll work with our trading partners for a new round of negotiations in
support of freer world trade, greater competition, and more open markets.

A rebirth of bipartisan cooperation, of economic growth, and military
deterrence, and a growing spirit of unity among our people at home and our
allies abroad underline a fundamental and far-reaching change: The United
States is safer, stronger, and more secure in 1984 than before. We can now
move with confidence to seize the opportunities for peace, and we will.

Tonight, I want to speak to the people of the Soviet Union, to tell them
it's true that our governments have had serious differences, but our sons
and daughters have never fought each other in war. And if we Americans have
our way, they never will.

People of the Soviet Union, there is only one sane policy, for your country
and mine, to preserve our civilization in this modern age: A nuclear war
cannot be won and must never be fought. The only value in our two nations
possessing nuclear weapons is to make sure they will never be used. But
then would it not be better to do away with them entirely?

People of the Soviet, President Dwight Eisenhower, who fought by your side
in World War II, said the essential struggle "is not merely man against man
or nation against nation. It is man against war." Americans are people of
peace. If your government wants peace, there will be peace. We can come
together in faith and friendship to build a safer and far better world for
our children and our children's children. And the whole world will rejoice.
That is my message to you.

Some days when life seems hard and we reach out for values to sustain us or
a friend to help us, we find a person who reminds us what it means to be
Americans.

Sergeant Stephen Trujillo, a medic in the 2d Ranger Battalion, 75th
Infantry, was in the first helicopter to land at the compound held by Cuban
forces in Grenada. He saw three other helicopters crash. Despite the
imminent explosion of the burning aircraft, he never hesitated. He ran
across 25 yards of open terrain through enemy fire to rescue wounded
soldiers. He directed two other medics, administered first aid, and
returned again and again to the crash site to carry his wounded friends to
safety.

Sergeant Trujillo, you and your fellow service men and women not only saved
innocent lives; you set a nation free. You inspire us as a force for
freedom, not for despotism; and, yes, for peace, not conquest. God bless
you.

And then there are unsung heroes: single parents, couples, church and civic
volunteers. Their hearts carry without complaint the pains of family and
community problems. They soothe our sorrow, heal our wounds, calm our
fears, and share our joy.

A person like Father Ritter is always there. His Covenant House programs in
New York and Houston provide shelter and help to thousands of frightened
and abused children each year. The same is true of Dr. Charles Carson.
Paralyzed in a plane crash, he still believed nothing is impossible. Today
in Minnesota, he works 80 hours a week without pay, helping pioneer the
field of computer-controlled walking. He has given hope to 500,000
paralyzed Americans that some day they may walk again.

How can we not believe in the greatness of America? How can we not do what
is right and needed to preserve this last best hope of man on Earth? After
all our struggles to restore America, to revive confidence in our country,
hope for our future, after all our hard-won victories earned through the
patience and courage of every citizen, we cannot, must not, and will not
turn back. We will finish our job. How could we do less? We're Americans.

Carl Sandburg said, "I see America not in the setting sun of a black night
of despair... I see America in the crimson light of a rising sun fresh
from the burning, creative hand of God... I see great days ahead for men
and women of will and vision."

I've never felt more strongly that America's best days and democracy's best
days lie ahead. We're a powerful force for good. With faith and courage, we
can perform great deeds and take freedom's next step. And we will. We will
carry on the tradition of a good and worthy people who have brought light
where there was darkness, warmth where there was cold, medicine where there
was disease, food where there was hunger, and peace where there was only
bloodshed.

Let us be sure that those who come after will say of us in our time, that
in our time we did everything that could be done. We finished the race; we
kept them free; we kept the faith.

Thank you very much. God bless you, and God bless America.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9:02 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of
Representatives. The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio and
television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of the Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

I come before you to report on the state of our Union, and I'm pleased to
report that after 4 years of united effort, the American people have
brought forth a nation renewed, stronger, freer, and more secure than
before.

Four years ago we began to change, forever I hope, our assumptions about
government and its place in our lives. Out of that change has come great
and robust growth--in our confidence, our economy, and our role in the
world.

Tonight America is stronger because of the values that we hold dear. We
believe faith and freedom must be our guiding stars, for they show us
truth, they make us brave, give us hope, and leave us wiser than we were.
Our progress began not in Washington, DC, but in the hearts of our
families, communities, workplaces, and voluntary groups which, together,
are unleashing the invincible spirit of one great nation under God.

Four years ago we said we would invigorate our economy by giving people
greater freedom and incentives to take risks and letting them keep more of
what they earned. We did what we promised, and a great industrial giant is
reborn.

Tonight we can take pride in 25 straight months of economic growth, the
strongest in 34 years; a 3-year inflation average of 3.9 percent, the
lowest in 17 years; and 7.3 million new jobs in 2 years, with more of our
citizens working than ever before.

New freedom in our lives has planted the rich seeds for future success:

For an America of wisdom that honors the family, knowing that if (as) the
family goes, so goes our civilization;

For an America of vision that sees tomorrow's dreams in the learning and
hard work we do today;

For an America of courage whose service men and women, even as we meet,
proudly stand watch on the frontiers of freedom;

For an America of compassion that opens its heart to those who cry out for
help.

We have begun well. But it's only a beginning. We're not here to
congratulate ourselves on what we have done but to challenge ourselves to
finish what has not yet been done.

We're here to speak for millions in our inner cities who long for real
jobs, safe neighborhoods, and schools that truly teach. We're here to speak
for the American farmer, the entrepreneur, and every worker in industries
fighting to modernize and compete. And, yes, we're here to stand, and
proudly so, for all who struggle to break free from totalitarianism, for
all who know in their hearts that freedom is the one true path to peace and
human happiness.

Proverbs tell us, without a vision the people perish. When asked what great
principle holds our Union together, Abraham Lincoln said: "Something in
(the) Declaration giving liberty, not alone to the people of this country,
but hope to the world for all future time."

We honor the giants of our history not by going back but forward to the
dreams their vision foresaw. My fellow citizens, this nation is poised for
greatness. The time has come to proceed toward a great new challenge--a
second American Revolution of hope and opportunity; a revolution carrying
us to new heights of progress by pushing back frontiers of knowledge and
space; a revolution of spirit that taps the soul of America, enabling us to
summon greater strength than we've ever known; and a revolution that
carries beyond our shores the golden promise of human freedom in a world of
peace.

Let us begin by challenging our conventional wisdom. There are no
constraints on the human mind, no walls around the human spirit, no
barriers to our progress except those we ourselves erect. Already, pushing
down tax rates has freed our economy to vault forward to record growth.

In Europe, they're calling it "the American Miracle." Day by day, we're
shattering accepted notions of what is possible. When I was growing up, we
failed to see how a new thing called radio would transform our marketplace.
Well, today, many have not yet seen how advances in technology are
transforming our lives.

In the late 1950's workers at the AT&amp;T semiconductor plant in Pennsylvania
produced five transistors a day for $7.50 apiece. They now produce over a
million for less than a penny apiece.

New laser techniques could revolutionize heart bypass surgery, cut
diagnosis time for viruses linked to cancer from weeks to minutes, reduce
hospital costs dramatically, and hold out new promise for saving human
lives.

Our automobile industry has overhauled assembly lines, increased worker
productivity, and is competitive once again.

We stand on the threshold of a great ability to produce more, do more, be
more. Our economy is not getting older and weaker; it's getting younger and
stronger. It doesn't need rest and supervision; it needs new challenge,
greater freedom. And that word "freedom" is the key to the second American
revolution that we need to bring about.

Let us move together with an historic reform of tax simplification for
fairness and growth. Last year I asked Treasury Secretary-then-Regan to
develop a plan to simplify the tax code, so all taxpayers would be treated
more fairly and personal tax rates could come further down.

We have cut tax rates by almost 25 percent, yet the tax system remains
unfair and limits our potential for growth. Exclusions and exemptions cause
similar incomes to be taxed at different levels. Low-income families face
steep tax barriers that make hard lives even harder. The Treasury
Department has produced an excellent reform plan, whose principles will
guide the final proposal that we will ask you to enact.

One thing that tax reform will not be is a tax increase in disguise. We
will not jeopardize the mortgage interest deduction that families need. We
will reduce personal tax rates as low as possible by removing many tax
preferences. We will propose a top rate of no more than 35 percent, and
possibly lower. And we will propose reducing corporate rates, while
maintaining incentives for capital formation.

To encourage opportunity and jobs rather than dependency and welfare, we
will propose that individuals living at or near the poverty line be totally
exempt from Federal income tax. To restore fairness to families, we will
propose increasing significantly the personal exemption.

And tonight, I am instructing Treasury Secretary James Baker--I have to get
used to saying that--to begin working with congressional authors and
committees for bipartisan legislation conforming to these principles. We
will call upon the American people for support and upon every man and woman
in this Chamber. Together, we can pass, this year, a tax bill for fairness,
simplicity, and growth, making this economy the engine of our dreams and
America the investment capital of the world. So let us begin.

Tax simplification will be a giant step toward unleashing the tremendous
pent-up power of our economy. But a second American revolution must carry
the promise of opportunity for all. It is time to liberate the spirit of
enterprise in the most distressed areas of our country.

This government will meet its responsibility to help those in need. But
policies that increase dependency, break up families, and destroy
self-respect are not progressive; they're reactionary. Despite our strides
in civil rights, blacks, Hispanics, and all minorities will not have full
and equal power until they have full economic power.

We have repeatedly sought passage of enterprise zones to help those in the
abandoned corners of our land find jobs, learn skills, and build better
lives. This legislation is supported by a majority of you.

Mr. Speaker, I know we agree that there must be no forgotten Americans.
Let us place new dreams in a million hearts and create a new generation of
entrepreneurs by passing enterprise zones this year. And, Tip, you could
make that a birthday present.

Nor must we lose the chance to pass our youth employment opportunity wage
proposal. We can help teenagers, who have the highest unemployment rate,
find summer jobs, so they can know the pride of work and have confidence in
their futures.

We'll continue to support the Job Training Partnership Act, which has a
nearly two-thirds job placement rate. Credits in education and health care
vouchers will help working families shop for services that they need.

Our administration is already encouraging certain low-income public housing
residents to own and manage their own dwellings. It's time that all public
housing residents have that opportunity of ownership.

The Federal Government can help create a new atmosphere of freedom. But
States and localities, many of which enjoy surpluses from the recovery,
must not permit their tax and regulatory policies to stand as barriers to
growth.

Let us resolve that we will stop spreading dependency and start spreading
opportunity; that we will stop spreading bondage and start spreading
freedom.

There are some who say that growth initiatives must await final action on
deficit reductions. Well, the best way to reduce deficits is through
economic growth. More businesses will be started, more investments made,
more jobs created, and more people will be on payrolls paying taxes. The
best way to reduce government spending is to reduce the need for spending
by increasing prosperity. Each added percentage point per year of real GNP
growth will lead to cumulative reduction in deficits of nearly $200 billion
over 5 years.

To move steadily toward a balanced budget, we must also lighten
government's claim on our total economy. We will not do this by raising
taxes. We must make sure that our economy grows faster than the growth in
spending by the Federal Government. In our fiscal year 1986 budget, overall
government program spending will be frozen at the current level. It must
not be one dime higher than fiscal year 1985, and three points are key.

First, the social safety net for the elderly, the needy, the disabled, and
unemployed will be left intact. Growth of our major health care programs,
Medicare and Medicaid, will be slowed, but protections for the elderly and
needy will be preserved.

Second, we must not relax our efforts to restore military strength just as
we near our goal of a fully equipped, trained, and ready professional
corps. National security is government's first responsibility; so in past
years defense spending took about half the Federal budget. Today it takes
less than a third. We've already reduced our planned defense expenditures
by nearly a hundred billion dollars over the past 4 years and reduced
projected spending again this year.

You know, we only have a military-industrial complex until a time of
danger, and then it becomes the arsenal of democracy. Spending for defense
is investing in things that are priceless--peace and freedom.

Third, we must reduce or eliminate costly government subsidies. For
example, deregulation of the airline industry has led to cheaper airfares,
but on Amtrak taxpayers pay about $35 per passenger every time an Amtrak
train leaves the station, It's time we ended this huge Federal subsidy.

Our farm program costs have quadrupled in recent years. Yet I know from
visiting farmers, many in great financial distress, that we need an orderly
transition to a market-oriented farm economy. We can help farmers best not
by expanding Federal payments but by making fundamental reforms, keeping
interest rates heading down, and knocking down foreign trade barriers to
American farm exports.

We're moving ahead with Grace commission reforms to eliminate waste and
improve government's management practices. In the long run, we must protect
the taxpayers from government. And I ask again that you pass, as 32 States
have now called for, an amendment mandating the Federal Government spend no
more than it takes in. And I ask for the authority, used responsibly by 43
Governors, to veto individual items in appropriation bills. Senator
Mattingly has introduced a bill permitting a 2-year trial run of the
line-item veto. I hope you'll pass and send that legislation to my desk.

Nearly 50 years of government living beyond its means has brought us to a
time of reckoning. Ours is but a moment in history. But one moment of
courage, idealism, and bipartisan unity can change American history
forever.

Sound monetary policy is key to long-running economic strength and
stability. We will continue to cooperate with the Federal Reserve Board,
seeking a steady policy that ensures price stability without keeping
interest rates artificially high or needlessly holding down growth.

Reducing unneeded red tape and regulations, and deregulating the energy,
transportation, and financial industries have unleashed new competition,
giving consumers more choices, better services, and lower prices. In just
one set of grant programs we have reduced 905 pages of regulations to 31.
We seek to fully deregulate natural gas to bring on new supplies and bring
us closer to energy independence. Consistent with safety standards, we will
continue removing restraints on the bus and railroad industries, we will
soon end up legislation--or send up legislation, I should say--to return
Conrail to the private sector where it belongs, and we will support further
deregulation of the trucking industry.

Every dollar the Federal Government does not take from us, every decision
it does not make for us will make our economy stronger, our lives more
abundant, our future more free.

Our second American revolution will push on to new possibilities not only
on Earth but in the next frontier of space. Despite budget restraints, we
will seek record funding for research and development.

We've seen the success of the space shuttle. Now we're going to develop a
permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise,
because in the next decade Americans and our friends around the world will
be living and working together in space.

In the zero gravity of space, we could manufacture in 30 days lifesaving
medicines it would take 30 years to make on Earth. We can make crystals of
exceptional purity to produce super computers, creating jobs, technologies,
and medical breakthroughs beyond anything we ever dreamed possible.

As we do all this, we'll continue to protect our natural resources. We will
seek reauthorization and expanded funding for the Superfund program to
continue cleaning up hazardous waste sites which threaten human health and
the environment.

Now, there's another great heritage to speak of this evening. Of all the
changes that have swept America the past 4 years, none brings greater
promise than our rediscovery of the values of faith, freedom, family, work,
and neighborhood.

We see signs of renewal in increased attendance in places of worship;
renewed optimism and faith in our future; love of country rediscovered by
our young, who are leading the way. We've rediscovered that work is good in
and of itself, that it ennobles us to create and contribute no matter how
seemingly humble our jobs. We've seen a powerful new current from an old
and honorable tradition--American generosity.

From thousands answering Peace Corps appeals to help boost food production
in Africa, to millions volunteering time, corporations adopting schools,
and communities pulling together to help the neediest among us at home, we
have refound our values. Private sector initiatives are crucial to our
future.

I thank the Congress for passing equal access legislation giving religious
groups the same right to use classrooms after school that other groups
enjoy. But no citizen need tremble, nor the world shudder, if a child
stands in a classroom and breathes a prayer. We ask you again, give
children back a right they had for a century and a half or more in this
country.

The question of abortion grips our nation. Abortion is either the taking of
a human life or it isn't. And if it is--and medical technology is
increasingly showing it is--it must be stopped. It is a terrible irony that
while some turn to abortion, so many others who cannot become parents cry
out for children to adopt. We have room for these children. We can fill the
cradles of those who want a child to love. And tonight I ask you in the
Congress to move this year on legislation to protect the unborn.

In the area of education, we're returning to excellence, and again, the
heroes are our people, not government. We're stressing basics of
discipline, rigorous testing, and homework, while helping children become
computer-smart as well. For 20 years scholastic aptitude test scores of our
high school students went down, but now they have gone up 2 of the last 3
years. We must go forward in our commitment to the new basics, giving
parents greater authority and making sure good teachers are rewarded for
hard work and achievement through merit pay.

Of all the changes in the past 20 years, none has more threatened our sense
of national well-being than the explosion of violent crime. One does not
have to be attacked to be a victim. The woman who must run to her car after
shopping at night is a victim. The couple draping their door with locks and
chains are victims; as is the tired, decent cleaning woman who can't ride a
subway home without being afraid.

We do not seek to violate the rights of defendants. But shouldn't we feel
more compassion for the victims of crime than for those who commit crime?
For the first time in 20 years, the crime index has fallen 2 years in a
row. We've convicted over 7,400 drug offenders and put them, as well as
leaders of organized crime, behind bars in record numbers.

But we must do more. I urge the House to follow the Senate and enact
proposals permitting use of all reliable evidence that police officers
acquire in good faith. These proposals would also reform the habeas corpus
laws and allow, in keeping with the will of the overwhelming majority of
Americans, the use of the death penalty where necessary.

There can be no economic revival in ghettos when the most violent among us
are allowed to roam free. It's time we restored domestic tranquility. And
we mean to do just that.

Just as we're positioned as never before to secure justice in our economy,
we're poised as never before to create a safer, freer, more peaceful world.
Our alliances are stronger than ever. Our economy is stronger than ever. We
have resumed our historic role as a leader of the free world. And all of
these together are a great force for peace.

Since 1981 we've been committed to seeking fair and verifiable arms
agreements that would lower the risk of war and reduce the size of nuclear
arsenals. Now our determination to maintain a strong defense has influenced
the Soviet Union to return to the bargaining table. Our negotiators must be
able to go to that table with the united support of the American people.
All of us have no greater dream than to see the day when nuclear weapons
are banned from this Earth forever.

Each Member of the Congress has a role to play in modernizing our defenses,
thus supporting our chances for a meaningful arms agreement. Your vote this
spring on the Peacekeeper missile will be a critical test of our resolve to
maintain the strength we need and move toward mutual and verifiable arms
reductions.

For the past 20 years we've believed that no war will be launched as long
as each side knows it can retaliate with a deadly counterstrike. Well, I
believe there's a better way of eliminating the threat of nuclear war. It
is a Strategic Defense Initiative aimed ultimately at finding a nonnuclear
defense against ballistic missiles. It's the most hopeful possibility of
the nuclear age. But it's not very well understood.

Some say it will bring war to the heavens, but its purpose is to deter war
in the heavens and on Earth. Now, some say the research would be expensive.
Perhaps, but it could save millions of lives, indeed humanity itself. And
some say if we build such a system, the Soviets will build a defense system
of their own. Well, they already have strategic defenses that surpass ours;
a civil defense system, where we have almost none; and a research program
covering roughly the same areas of technology that we're now exploring. And
finally some say the research will take a long time. Well, the answer to
that is: Let's get started.

Harry Truman once said that, ultimately, our security and the world's hopes
for peace and human progress "lie not in measures of defense or in the
control of weapons, but in the growth and expansion of freedom and
self-government."

And tonight, we declare anew to our fellow citizens of the world: Freedom
is not the sole prerogative of a chosen few; it is the universal right of
all God's children. Look to where peace and prosperity flourish today. It
is in homes that freedom built. Victories against poverty are greatest and
peace most secure where people live by laws that ensure free press, free
speech, and freedom to worship, vote, and create wealth.

Our mission is to nourish and defend freedom and democracy, and to
communicate these ideals everywhere we can. America's economic success is
freedom's success; it can be repeated a hundred times in a hundred
different nations. Many countries in east Asia and the Pacific have few
resources other than the enterprise of their own people. But through low
tax rates and free markets they've soared ahead of centralized economies.
And now China is opening up its economy to meet its needs.

We need a stronger and simpler approach to the process of making and
implementing trade policy, and we'll be studying potential changes in that
process in the next few weeks. We've seen the benefits of free trade and
lived through the disasters of protectionism. Tonight I ask all our trading
partners, developed and developing alike, to join us in a new round of
trade negotiations to expand trade and competition and strengthen the
global economy--and to begin it in this next year.

There are more than 3 billion human beings living in Third World countries
with an average per capita income of $650 a year. Many are victims of
dictatorships that impoverished them with taxation and corruption. Let us
ask our allies to join us in a practical program of trade and assistance
that fosters economic development through personal incentives to help these
people climb from poverty on their own.

We cannot play innocents abroad in a world that's not innocent; nor can we
be passive when freedom is under siege. Without resources, diplomacy cannot
succeed. Our security assistance programs help friendly governments defend
themselves and give them confidence to work for peace. And I hope that you
in the Congress will understand that, dollar for dollar, security
assistance contributes as much to global security as our own defense
budget.

We must stand by all our democratic allies. And we must not break faith
with those who are risking their lives--on every continent, from
Afghanistan to Nicaragua--to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure
rights which have been ours from birth.

The Sandinista dictatorship of Nicaragua, with full Cuban-Soviet bloc
support, not only persecutes its people, the church, and denies a free
press, but arms and provides bases for Communist terrorists attacking
neighboring states. Support for freedom fighters is self-defense and
totally consistent with the OAS and U.N. Charters. It is essential that the
Congress continue all facets of our assistance to Central America. I want
to work with you to support the democratic forces whose struggle is tied to
our own security.

And tonight, I've spoken of great plans and great dreams. They're dreams we
can make come true. Two hundred years of American history should have
taught us that nothing is impossible.

Ten years ago a young girl left Vietnam with her family, part of the exodus
that followed the fall of Saigon. They came to the United States with no
possessions and not knowing a word of English. Ten years ago--the young
girl studied hard, learned English, and finished high school in the top of
her class. And this May, May 22d to be exact, is a big date on her
calendar. Just 10 years from the time she left Vietnam, she will graduate
from the United States Military Academy at West Point. I thought you might
like to meet an American hero named Jean Nguyen.

Now, there's someone else here tonight, born 79 years ago. She lives in the
inner city, where she cares for infants born of mothers who are heroin
addicts. The children, born in withdrawal, are sometimes even dropped on
her doorstep. She helps them with love. Go to her house some night, and
maybe you'll see her silhouette against the window as she walks the floor
talking softly, soothing a child in her arms--Mother Hale of Harlem, and
she, too, is an American hero.

Jean, Mother Hale, your lives tell us that the oldest American saying is
new again: Anything is possible in America if we have the faith, the will,
and the heart. History is asking us once again to be a force for good in
the world. Let us begin in unity, with justice, and love.

Thank you, and God bless you.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9:05 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of
Representatives. The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio
and television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of the Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

Thank you for allowing me to delay my address until this evening. We paused
together to mourn and honor the valor of our seven Challenger heroes. And I
hope that we are now ready to do what they would want us to do: Go forward,
America, and reach for the stars. We will never forget those brave seven,
but we shall go forward.

Mr. Speaker, before I begin my prepared remarks, may I point out that
tonight marks the 10th and last State of the Union Message that you've
presided over. And on behalf of the American people, I want to salute you
for your service to Congress and country. Here's to you!

I have come to review with you the progress of our nation, to speak of
unfinished work, and to set our sights on the future. I am pleased to
report the state of our Union is stronger than a year ago and growing
stronger each day. Tonight we look out on a rising America, firm of heart,
united in spirit, powerful in pride and patriotism. America is on the move!
But it wasn't long ago that we looked out on a different land: locked
factory gates, long gasoline lines, intolerable prices, and interest rates
turning the greatest country on Earth into a land of broken dreams.
Government growing beyond our consent had become a lumbering giant,
slamming shut the gates of opportunity, threatening to crush the very roots
of our freedom. What brought America back? The American people brought us
back with quiet courage and common sense, with undying faith that in this
nation under God the future will be ours; for the future belongs to the
free.

Tonight the American people deserve our thanks for 37 straight months of
economic growth, for sunrise firms and modernized industries creating 9
million new jobs in 3 years, interest rates cut in half, inflation falling
over from 12 percent in 1980 to under 4 today, and a mighty river of good
works--a record $74 billion in voluntary giving just last year alone. And
despite the pressures of our modern world, family and community remain the
moral core of our society, guardians of our values and hopes for the
future. Family and community are the costars of this great American
comeback. They are why we say tonight: Private values must be at the heart
of public policies.

What is true for families in America is true for America in the family of
free nations. History is no captive of some inevitable force. History is
made by men and women of vision and courage. Tonight freedom is on the
march. The United States is the economic miracle, the model to which the
world once again turns. We stand for an idea whose time is now: Only by
lifting the weights from the shoulders of all can people truly prosper and
can peace among all nations be secure. Teddy Roosevelt said that a nation
that does great work lives forever. We have done well, but we cannot stop
at the foothills when Everest beckons. It's time for America to be all that
we can be.

We speak tonight of an agenda for the future, an agenda for a safer, more
secure world. And we speak about the necessity for actions to steel us for
the challenges of growth, trade, and security in the next decade and the
year 2000. And we will do it--not by breaking faith with bedrock principles
but by breaking free from failed policies. Let us begin where storm clouds
loom darkest--right here in Washington, DC. This week I will send you our
detailed proposals; tonight let us speak of our responsibility to redefine
government's role: not to control, not to demand or command, not to contain
us, but to help in times of need and, above all, to create a ladder of
opportunity to full employment so that all Americans can climb toward
economic power and justice on their own.

But we cannot win the race to the future shackled to a system that can't
even pass a Federal budget. We cannot win that race held back by
horse-and-buggy programs that waste tax dollars and squander human
potential. We cannot win that race if we're swamped in a sea of red ink.
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, I know, and the American people know the
Federal budget system is broken. It doesn't work. Before we leave this
city, let's you and I work together to fix it, and then we can finally give
the American people a balanced budget.

Members of Congress, passage of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings gives us an historic
opportunity to achieve what has eluded our national leadership for decades:
forcing the Federal Government to live within its means. Your schedule now
requires that the budget resolution be passed by April 15th, the very day
America's families have to foot the bill for the budgets that you produce.
How often we read of a husband and wife both working, struggling from
paycheck to paycheck to raise a family, meet a mortgage, pay their taxes
and bills. And yet some in Congress say taxes must be raised. Well, I'm
sorry; they're asking the wrong people to tighten their belts. It's time we
reduce the Federal budget and left the family budget alone. We do not face
large deficits because American families are undertaxed; we face those
deficits because the Federal Government overspends.

The detailed budget that we will submit will meet the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
target for deficit reductions, meet our commitment to ensure a strong
national defense, meet our commitment to protect Social Security and the
truly less fortunate, and, yes, meet our commitment to not raise taxes. How
should we accomplish this? Well, not by taking from those in need. As
families take care of their own, government must provide shelter and
nourishment for those who cannot provide for themselves. But we must revise
or replace programs enacted in the name of compassion that degrade the
moral worth of work, encourage family breakups, and drive entire
communities into a bleak and heartless dependency. Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
can mark a dramatic improvement. But experience shows that simply setting
deficit targets does not assure they'll be met. We must proceed with Grace
commission reforms against waste.

And tonight I ask you to give me what 43 Governors have: Give me a
line-item veto this year. Give me the authority to veto waste, and I'll
take the responsibility, I'll make the cuts, I'll take the heat. This
authority would not give me any monopoly power, but simply prevent spending
measures from sneaking through that could not pass on their own merit. And
you can sustain or override my veto; that's the way the system should work.
Once we've made the hard choices, we should lock in our gains with a
balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.

I mentioned that we will meet our commitment to national defense. We must
meet it. Defense is not just another budget expense. Keeping America
strong, free, and at peace is solely the responsibility of the Federal
Government; it is government's prime responsibility. We have devoted 5
years trying to narrow a dangerous gap born of illusion and neglect, and
we've made important gains. Yet the threat from Soviet forces, conventional
and strategic, from the Soviet drive for domination, from the increase in
espionage and state terror remains great. This is reality. Closing our eyes
will not make reality disappear. We pledged together to hold real growth in
defense spending to the bare minimum. My budget honors that pledge, and I'm
now asking you, the Congress, to keep its end of the bargain. The Soviets
must know that if America reduces her defenses, it will be because of a
reduced threat, not a reduced resolve.

Keeping America strong is as vital to the national security as controlling
Federal spending is to our economic security. But, as I have said before,
the most powerful force we can enlist against the Federal deficit is an
ever-expanding American economy, unfettered and free. The magic of
opportunity--unreserved, unfailing, unrestrained--isn't this the calling
that unites us? I believe our tax rate cuts for the people have done more
to spur a spirit of risk-taking and help America's economy break free than
any program since John Kennedy's tax cut almost a quarter century ago.

Now history calls us to press on, to complete efforts for an historic tax
reform providing new opportunity for all and ensuring that all pay their
fair share, but no more. We've come this far. Will you join me now, and
we'll walk this last mile together? You know my views on this. We cannot
and we will not accept tax reform that is a tax increase in disguise. True
reform must be an engine of productivity and growth, and that means a top
personal rate no higher than 35 percent. True reform must be truly fair,
and that means raising personal exemptions to $2,000. True reform means a
tax system that at long last is profamily, projobs, profuture, and
pro-America.

As we knock down the barriers to growth, we must redouble our efforts for
freer and fairer trade. We have already taken actions to counter unfair
trading practices and to pry open closed foreign markets. We will continue
to do so. We will also oppose legislation touted as providing protection
that in reality pits one American worker against another, one industry
against another, one community against another, and that raises prices for
us all. If the United States can trade with other nations on a level
playing field, we can outproduce, outcompete, and outsell anybody, anywhere
in the world.

The constant expansion of our economy and exports requires a sound and
stable dollar at home and reliable exchange rates around the world. We must
never again permit wild currency swings to cripple our farmers and other
exporters. Farmers, in particular, have suffered from past unwise
government policies. They must not be abandoned with problems they did not
create and cannot control. We've begun coordinating economic and monetary
policy among our major trading partners. But there's more to do, and
tonight I am directing Treasury Secretary Jim Baker to determine if the
nations of the world should convene to discuss the role and relationship of
our currencies.

Confident in our future and secure in our values, Americans are striving
forward to embrace the future. We see it not only in our recovery but in 3
straight years of falling crime rates, as families and communities band
together to fight pornography, drugs, and lawlessness and to give back to
their children the safe and, yes, innocent childhood they deserve. We see
it in the renaissance in education, the rising SAT scores for 3 years--last
year's increase, the greatest since 1963. It wasn't government and
Washington lobbies that turned education around; it was the American people
who, in reaching for excellence, knew to reach back to basics. We must
continue the advance by supporting discipline in our schools, vouchers that
give parents freedom of choice; and we must give back to our children their
lost right to acknowledge God in their classrooms.

We are a nation of idealists, yet today there is a wound in our national
conscience. America will never be whole as long as the right to life
granted by our Creator is denied to the unborn. For the rest of my time, I
shall do what I can to see that this wound is one day healed.

As we work to make the American dream real for all, we must also look to
the condition of America's families. Struggling parents today worry how
they will provide their children the advantages that their parents gave
them. In the welfare culture, the breakdown of the family, the most basic
support system, has reached crisis proportions--in female and child
poverty, child abandonment, horrible crimes, and deteriorating schools.
After hundreds of billions of dollars in poverty programs, the plight of
the poor grows more painful. But the waste in dollars and cents pales
before the most tragic loss: the sinful waste of human spirit and
potential. We can ignore this terrible truth no longer. As Franklin
Roosevelt warned 51 years ago, standing before this Chamber, he said,
"Welfare is a narcotic, a subtle destroyer of the human spirit." And we
must now escape the spider's web of dependency.

Tonight I am charging the White House Domestic Council to present me by
December 1, 1986, an evaluation of programs and a strategy for immediate
action to meet the financial, educational, social, and safety concerns of
poor families. I'm talking about real and lasting emancipation, because the
success of welfare should be judged by how many of its recipients become
independent of welfare. Further, after seeing how devastating illness can
destroy the financial security of the family, I am directing the Secretary
of Health and Human Services, Dr. Otis Bowen, to report to me by year end
with recommendations on how the private sector and government can work
together to address the problems of affordable insurance for those whose
life savings would otherwise be threatened when catastrophic illness
strikes.

And tonight I want to speak directly to America's younger generation,
because you hold the destiny of our nation in your hands. With all the
temptations young people face, it sometimes seems the allure of the
permissive society requires superhuman feats of self-control. But the call
of the future is too strong, the challenge too great to get lost in the
blind alleyways of dissolution, drugs, and despair. Never has there been a
more exciting time to be alive, a time of rousing wonder and heroic
achievement. As they said in the film "Back to the Future," "Where we're
going, we don't need roads."

Well, today physicists peering into the infinitely small realms of
subatomic particles find reaffirmations of religious faith. Astronomers
build a space telescope that can see to the edge of the universe and
possibly back to the moment of creation. So, yes, this nation remains fully
committed to America's space program. We're going forward with our shuttle
flights. We're going forward to build our space station. And we are going
forward with research on a new Orient Express that could, by the end of the
next decade, take off from Dulles Airport, accelerate up to 25 times the
speed of sound, attaining low Earth orbit or flying to Tokyo within 2
hours. And the same technology transforming our lives can solve the
greatest problem of the 20th century. A security shield can one day render
nuclear weapons obsolete and free mankind from the prison of nuclear
terror. America met one historic challenge and went to the Moon. Now
America must meet another: to make our strategic defense real for all the
citizens of planet Earth.

Let us speak of our deepest longing for the future: to leave our children a
land that is free and just and a world at peace. It is my hope that our
fireside summit in Geneva and Mr. Gorbachev's upcoming visit to America can
lead to a more stable relationship. Surely no people on Earth hate war or
love peace more than we Americans. But we cannot stroll into the future
with childlike faith. Our differences with a system that openly proclaims
and practices an alleged right to command people's lives and to export its
ideology by force are deep and abiding. Logic and history compel us to
accept that our relationship be guided by realism--rock-hard, cleareyed,
steady, and sure. Our negotiators in Geneva have proposed a radical cut in
offensive forces by each side with no cheating. They have made clear that
Soviet compliance with the letter and spirit of agreements is essential. If
the Soviet Government wants an agreement that truly reduces nuclear arms,
there will be such an agreement.

But arms control is no substitute for peace. We know that peace follows in
freedom's path and conflicts erupt when the will of the people is denied.
So, we must prepare for peace not only by reducing weapons but by
bolstering prosperity, liberty, and democracy however and wherever we can.
We advance the promise of opportunity every time we speak out on behalf of
lower tax rates, freer markets, sound currencies around the world. We
strengthen the family of freedom every time we work with allies and come to
the aid of friends under siege. And we can enlarge the family of free
nations if we will defend the unalienable rights of all God's children to
follow their dreams.

To those imprisoned in regimes held captive, to those beaten for daring to
fight for freedom and democracy--for their right to worship, to speak, to
live, and to prosper in the family of free nations--we say to you tonight:
You are not alone, freedom fighters. America will support with moral and
material assistance your right not just to fight and die for freedom but to
fight and win freedom--to win freedom in Afghanistan, in Angola, in
Cambodia, and in Nicaragua. This is a great moral challenge for the entire
free world.

Surely no issue is more important for peace in our own hemisphere, for the
security of our frontiers, for the protection of our vital interests, than
to achieve democracy in Nicaragua and to protect Nicaragua's democratic
neighbors. This year I will be asking Congress for the means to do what
must be done for that great and good cause. As (former Senator Henry
M.)Scoop Jackson, the inspiration for our Bipartisan Commission on Central
America, once said, "In matters of national security, the best politics is
no politics."

What we accomplish this year, in each challenge we face, will set our
course for the balance of the decade, indeed, for the remainder of the
century. After all we've done so far, let no one say that this nation
cannot reach the destiny of our dreams. America believes, America is ready,
America can win the race to the future--and we shall. The American dream is
a song of hope that rings through night winter air; vivid, tender music
that warms our hearts when the least among us aspire to the greatest
things: to venture a daring enterprise; to unearth new beauty in music,
literature, and art; to discover a new universe inside a tiny silicon chip
or a single human cell.

We see the dream coming true in the spirit of discovery of Richard Cavoli.
All his life he's been enthralled by the mysteries of medicine. And,
Richard, we know that the experiment that you began in high school was
launched and lost last week, yet your dream lives. And as long as it's
real, work of noble note will yet be done, work that could reduce the
harmful effects of x rays on patients and enable astronomers to view the
golden gateways of the farthest stars.

We see the dream glow in the towering talent of a 12-year-old, Tyrone Ford.
A child prodigy of gospel music, he has surmounted personal adversity to
become an accomplished pianist and singer. He also directs the choirs of
three churches and has performed at the Kennedy Center. With God as your
composer, Tyrone, your music will be the music of angels.

We see the dream being saved by the courage of the 13-year-old Shelby
Butler, honor student and member of her school's safety patrol. Seeing
another girl freeze in terror before an out-of-control school bus, she
risked her life and pulled her to safety. With bravery like yours, Shelby,
America need never fear for our future.

And we see the dream born again in the joyful compassion of a 13 year old,
Trevor Ferrell. Two years ago, age 11, watching men and women bedding down
in abandoned doorways--on television he was watching--Trevor left his
suburban Philadelphia home to bring blankets and food to the helpless and
homeless. And now 250 people help him fulfill his nightly vigil. Trevor,
yours is the living spirit of brotherly love.

Would you four stand up for a moment? Thank you, thank you. You are heroes
of our hearts. We look at you and know it's true: In this land of dreams
fulfilled, where greater dreams may be imagined, nothing is impossible, no
victory is beyond our reach, no glory will ever be too great.

So, now it's up to us, all of us, to prepare America for that day when our
work will pale before the greatness of America's champions in the 21st
century. The world's hopes rest with America's future; America's hopes rest
with us. So, let us go forward to create our world of tomorrow in faith, in
unity, and in love.

God bless you, and God bless America.

NOTE: The President spoke at 8:04 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of
Representatives. The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio
and television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished Members of Congress, honored
guests, and fellow citizens:

May I congratulate all of you who are Members of this historic 100th
Congress of the United States of America. In this 200th anniversary year of
our Constitution, you and I stand on the shoulders of giants--men whose
words and deeds put wind in the sails of freedom. However, we must always
remember that our Constitution is to be celebrated not for being old, but
for being young--young with the same energy, spirit, and promise that
filled each eventful day in Philadelphia's statehouse. We will be guided
tonight by their acts, and we will be guided forever by their words.

Now, forgive me, but I can't resist sharing a story from those historic
days. Philadelphia was bursting with civic pride in the spring of 1787, and
its newspapers began embellishing the arrival of the Convention delegates
with elaborate social classifications. Governors of States were called
Excellency. Justices and Chancellors had reserved for them honorable with a
capital "H." For Congressmen, it was honorable with a small "h." And all
others were referred to as "the following respectable characters." Well,
for this 100th Congress, I invoke special executive powers to declare that
each of you must never be titled less than honorable with a capital "H."
Incidentally, I'm delighted you are celebrating the 100th birthday of the
Congress. It's always a pleasure to congratulate someone with more
birthdays than I've had.

Now, there's a new face at this place of honor tonight. And please join me
in warm congratulations to the Speaker of the House, Jim Wright. Mr.
Speaker, you might recall a similar situation in your very first session of
Congress 32 years ago. Then, as now, the speakership had changed hands and
another great son of Texas, Sam Rayburn--"Mr. Sam"--sat in your chair. I
cannot find better words than those used by President Eisenhower that
evening. He said, "We shall have much to do together; I am sure that we
will get it done and that we shall do it in harmony and good will." Tonight
I renew that pledge. To you, Mr. Speaker, and to Senate Majority Leader
Robert Byrd, who brings 34 years of distinguished service to the Congress,
may I say: Though there are changes in the Congress, America's interests
remain the same. And I am confident that, along with Republican leaders Bob
Michel and Bob Dole, this Congress can make history.

Six years ago I was here to ask the Congress to join me in America's new
beginning. Well, the results are something of which we can all be proud.
Our inflation rate is now the lowest in a quarter of a century. The prime
interest rate has fallen from the 21 1/2 percent the month before we took
office to 7 1/2 percent today. And those rates have triggered the most
housing starts in 8 years. The unemployment rate--still too high--is the
lowest in nearly 7 years, and our people have created nearly 13 million new
jobs. Over 61 percent of everyone over the age of 16, male and female, is
employed--the highest percentage on record. Let's roll up our sleeves and
go to work and put America's economic engine at full throttle. We can also
be heartened by our progress across the world. Most important, America is
at peace tonight, and freedom is on the march. And we've done much these
past years to restore our defenses, our alliances, and our leadership in
the world. Our sons and daughters in the services once again wear their
uniforms with pride.

But though we've made much progress, I have one major regret: I took a risk
with regard to our action in Iran. It did not work, and for that I assume
full responsibility. The goals were worthy. I do not believe it was wrong
to try to establish contacts with a country of strategic importance or to
try to save lives. And certainly it was not wrong to try to secure freedom
for our citizens held in barbaric captivity. But we did not achieve what we
wished, and serious mistakes were made in trying to do so. We will get to
the bottom of this, and I will take whatever action is called for. But in
debating the past, we must not deny ourselves the successes of the future.
Let it never be said of this generation of Americans that we became so
obsessed with failure that we refused to take risks that could further the
cause of peace and freedom in the world. Much is at stake here, and the
Nation and the world are watching to see if we go forward together in the
national interest or if we let partisanship weaken us. And let there be no
mistake about American policy: We will not sit idly by if our interests or
our friends in the Middle East are threatened, nor will we yield to
terrorist blackmail.

And now, ladies and gentlemen of the Congress, why don't we get to work? I
am pleased to report that because of our efforts to rebuild the strength of
America, the world is a safer place. Earlier this month I submitted a
budget to defend America and maintain our momentum to make up for neglect
in the last decade. Well, I ask you to vote out a defense and foreign
affairs budget that says yes to protecting our country. While the world is
safer, it is not safe.

Since 1970 the Soviets have invested $500 billion more on their military
forces than we have. Even today, though nearly 1 in 3 Soviet families is
without running hot water and the average family spends 2 hours a day
shopping for the basic necessities of life, their government still found
the resources to transfer $75 billion in weapons to client states in the
past 5 years--clients like Syria, Vietnam, Cuba, Libya, Angola, Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, and Nicaragua. With 120,000 Soviet combat and military
personnel and 15,000 military advisers in Asia, Africa, and Latin America,
can anyone still doubt their single-minded determination to expand their
power? Despite this, the Congress cut my request for critical U.S. security
assistance to free nations by 21 percent this year, and cut defense
requests by $85 billion in the last 3 years.

These assistance programs serve our national interests as well as mutual
interests. And when the programs are devastated, American interests are
harmed. My friends, it's my duty as President to say to you again tonight
that there is no surer way to lose freedom than to lose our resolve. Today
the brave people of Afghanistan are showing that resolve. The Soviet Union
says it wants a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan, yet it continues a
brutal war and props up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. We are
ready to support a political solution that guarantees the rapid withdrawal
of all Soviet troops and genuine self-determination for the Afghan people.

In Central America, too, the cause of freedom is being tested. And our
resolve is being tested there as well. Here, especially, the world is
watching to see how this nation responds. Today over 90 percent of the
people of Latin America live in democracy. Democracy is on the march in
Central and South America. Communist Nicaragua is the odd man
out--suppressing the church, the press, and democratic dissent and
promoting subversion in the region. We support diplomatic efforts, but
these efforts can never succeed if the Sandinistas win their war against
the Nicaraguan people.

Our commitment to a Western Hemisphere safe from aggression did not occur
by spontaneous generation on the day that we took office. It began with the
Monroe Doctrine in 1823 and continues our historic bipartisan American
policy. Franklin Roosevelt said we "are determined to do everything
possible to maintain peace on this hemisphere." President Truman was very
blunt: "International communism seeks to crush and undermine and destroy
the independence of the Americas. We cannot let that happen here." And John
F. Kennedy made clear that "Communist domination in this hemisphere can
never be negotiated." Some in this Congress may choose to depart from this
historic commitment, but I will not.

This year we celebrate the second century of our Constitution. The
Sandinistas just signed theirs 2 weeks ago, and then suspended it. We won't
know how my words tonight will be reported there for one simple reason:
There is no free press in Nicaragua. Nicaraguan freedom fighters have never
asked us to wage their battle, but I will fight any effort to shut off
their lifeblood and consign them to death, defeat, or a life without
freedom. There must be no Soviet beachhead in Central America.

You know, we Americans have always preferred dialog to conflict, and so, we
always remain open to more constructive relations with the Soviet Union.
But more responsible Soviet conduct around the world is a key element of
the U.S.-Soviet agenda. Progress is also required on the other items of our
agenda as well--real respect for human rights and more open contacts
between our societies and, of course, arms reduction.

In Iceland, last October, we had one moment of opportunity that the Soviets
dashed because they sought to cripple our Strategic Defense Initiative,
SDI. I wouldn't let them do it then; I won't let them do it now or in the
future. This is the most positive and promising defense program we have
undertaken. It's the path, for both sides, to a safer future--a system that
defends human life instead of threatening it. SDI will go forward. The
United States has made serious, fair, and far-reaching proposals to the
Soviet Union, and this is a moment of rare opportunity for arms reduction.
But I will need, and American negotiators in Geneva will need, Congress'
support. Enacting the Soviet negotiating position into American law would
not be the way to win a good agreement. So, I must tell you in this
Congress I will veto any effort that undercuts our national security and
our negotiating leverage.

Now, today, we also find ourselves engaged in expanding peaceful commerce
across the world. We will work to expand our opportunities in international
markets through the Uruguay round of trade negotiations and to complete an
historic free trade arrangement between the world's two largest trading
partners, Canada and the United States. Our basic trade policy remains the
same: We remain opposed as ever to protectionism, because America's growth
and future depend on trade. But we would insist on trade that is fair and
free. We are always willing to be trade partners but never trade patsies.

Now, from foreign borders let us return to our own, because America in the
world is only as strong as America at home. This 100th Congress has high
responsibilities. I begin with a gentle reminder that many of these are
simply the incomplete obligations of the past. The American people deserve
to be impatient, because we do not yet have the public house in order.
We've had great success in restoring our economic integrity, and we've
rescued our nation from the worst economic mess since the Depression. But
there's more to do. For starters, the Federal deficit is outrageous. For
years I've asked that we stop pushing onto our children the excesses of our
government. And what the Congress finally needs to do is pass a
constitutional amendment that mandates a balanced budget and forces
government to live within its means. States, cities, and the families of
America balance their budgets. Why can't we?

Next, the budget process is a sorry spectacle. The missing of deadlines and
the nightmare of monstrous continuing resolutions packing hundreds of
billions of dollars of spending into one bill must be stopped. We ask the
Congress once again: Give us the same tool that 43 Governors have--a
lineitem veto so we can carve out the boondoggles and pork, those items
that would never survive on their own. I will send the Congress broad
recommendations on the budget, but first I'd like to see yours. Let's go to
work and get this done together.

But now let's talk about this year's budget. Even though I have submitted
it within the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction target, I have seen
suggestions that we might postpone that timetable. Well, I think the
American people are tired of hearing the same old excuses. Together we made
a commitment to balance the budget. Now let's keep it. As for those
suggestions that the answer is higher taxes, the American people have
repeatedly rejected that shop-worn advice. They know that we don't have
deficits because people are taxed too little. We have deficits because big
government spends too much.

Now, next month I'll place two additional reforms before the Congress.
We've created a welfare monster that is a shocking indictment of our sense
of priorities. Our national welfare system consists of some 59 major
programs and over 6,000 pages of Federal laws and regulations on which more
than $132 billion was spent in 1985. I will propose a new national welfare
strategy, a program of welfare reform through State-sponsored,
community-based demonstration projects. This is the time to reform this
outmoded social dinosaur and finally break the poverty trap. Now, we will
never abandon those who, through no fault of their own, must have our help.
But let us work to see how many can be freed from the dependency of welfare
and made self-supporting, which the great majority of welfare recipients
want more than anything else. Next, let us remove a financial specter
facing our older Americans: the fear of an illness so expensive that it can
result in having to make an intolerable choice between bankruptcy and
death. I will submit legislation shortly to help free the elderly from the
fear of catastrophic illness.

Now let's turn to the future. It's widely said that America is losing her
competitive edge. Well, that won't happen if we act now. How well prepared
are we to enter the 21st century? In my lifetime, America set the standard
for the world. It is now time to determine that we should enter the next
century having achieved a level of excellence unsurpassed in history. We
will achieve this, first, by guaranteeing that government does everything
possible to promote America's ability to compete. Second, we must act as
individuals in a quest for excellence that will not be measured by new
proposals or billions in new funding. Rather, it involves an expenditure of
American spirit and just plain American grit. The Congress will soon
receive my comprehensive proposals to enhance our competitiveness,
including new science and technology centers and strong new funding for
basic research. The bill will include legal and regulatory reforms and
weapons to fight unfair trade practices. Competitiveness also means giving
our farmers a shot at participating fairly and fully in a changing world
market.

Preparing for the future must begin, as always, with our children. We need
to set for them new and more rigorous goals. We must demand more of
ourselves and our children by raising literacy levels dramatically by the
year 2000. Our children should master the basic concepts of math and
science, and let's insist that students not leave high school until they
have studied and understood the basic documents of our national heritage.
There's one more thing we can't let up on: Let's redouble our personal
efforts to provide for every child a safe and drug-free learning
environment. If our crusade against drugs succeeds with our children, we
will defeat that scourge all over the country.

Finally, let's stop suppressing the spiritual core of our national being.
Our nation could not have been conceived without divine help. Why is it
that we can build a nation with our prayers, but we can't use a schoolroom
for voluntary prayer? The 100th Congress of the United States should be
remembered as the one that ended the expulsion of God from America's
classrooms.

The quest for excellence into the 21st century begins in the schoolroom but
must go next to the workplace. More than 20 million new jobs will be
created before the new century unfolds, and by then, our economy should be
able to provide a job for everyone who wants to work. We must also enable
our workers to adapt to the rapidly changing nature of the workplace. And I
will propose substantial, new Federal commitments keyed to retraining and
job mobility.

Over the next few weeks, I'll be sending the Congress a complete series of
these special messages--on budget reform, welfare reform, competitiveness,
including education, trade, worker training and assistance, agriculture,
and other subjects. The Congress can give us these tools, but to make these
tools work, it really comes down to just being our best. And that is the
core of American greatness. The responsibility of freedom presses us
towards higher knowledge and, I believe, moral and spiritual greatness.
Through lower taxes and smaller government, government has its ways of
freeing people's spirits. But only we, each of us, can let the spirit soar
against our own individual standards. Excellence is what makes freedom
ring. And isn't that what we do best?

We're entering our third century now, but it's wrong to judge our nation by
its years. The calendar can't measure America because we were meant to be
an endless experiment in freedom--with no limit to our reaches, no
boundaries to what we can do, no end point to our hopes. The United States
Constitution is the impassioned and inspired vehicle by which we travel
through history. It grew out of the most fundamental inspiration of our
existence: that we are here to serve Him by living free--that living free
releases in us the noblest of impulses and the best of our abilities; that
we would use these gifts for good and generous purposes and would secure
them not just for ourselves and for our children but for all mankind.

Over the years--I won't count if you don't--nothing has been so
heartwarming to me as speaking to America's young, and the little ones
especially, so fresh-faced and so eager to know. Well, from time to time
I've been with them--they will ask about our Constitution. And I hope you
Members of Congress will not deem this a breach of protocol if you'll
permit me to share these thoughts again with the young people who might be
listening or watching this evening. I've read the constitutions of a number
of countries, including the Soviet Union's. Now, some people are surprised
to hear that they have a constitution, and it even supposedly grants a
number of freedoms to its people. Many countries have written into their
constitution provisions for freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.
Well, if this is true, why is the Constitution of the United States so
exceptional?

Well, the difference is so small that it almost escapes you, but it's so
great it tells you the whole story in just three words: We the people. In
those other constitutions, the Government tells the people of those
countries what they're allowed to do. In our Constitution, we the people
tell the Government what it can do, and it can do only those things listed
in that document and no others. Virtually every other revolution in history
has just exchanged one set of rulers for another set of rulers. Our
revolution is the first to say the people are the masters and government is
their servant. And you young people out there, don't ever forget that.
Someday you could be in this room, but wherever you are, America is
depending on you to reach your highest and be your best--because here in
America, we the people are in charge.

Just three words: We the people--those are the kids on Christmas Day
looking out from a frozen sentry post on the 38th parallel in Korea or
aboard an aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean. A million miles from home,
but doing their duty.

We the people--those are the warmhearted whose numbers we can't begin to
count, who'll begin the day with a little prayer for hostages they will
never know and MIA families they will never meet. Why? Because that's the
way we are, this unique breed we call Americans.

We the people--they're farmers on tough times, but who never stop feeding a
hungry world. They're the volunteers at the hospital choking back their
tears for the hundredth time, caring for a baby struggling for life because
of a mother who used drugs. And you'll forgive me a special memory--it's a
million mothers like Nelle Reagan who never knew a stranger or turned a
hungry person away from her kitchen door.

We the people--they refute last week's television commentary downgrading
our optimism and our idealism. They are the entrepreneurs, the builders,
the pioneers, and a lot of regular folks--the true heroes of our land who
make up the most uncommon nation of doers in history. You know they're
Americans because their spirit is as big as the universe and their hearts
are bigger than their spirits.

We the people--starting the third century of a dream and standing up to
some cynic who's trying to tell us we're not going to get any better. Are
we at the end? Well, I can't tell it any better than the real thing--a
story recorded by James Madison from the final moments of the
Constitutional Convention, September 17th, 1787. As the last few members
signed the document, Benjamin Franklin--the oldest delegate at 81 years and
in frail health--looked over toward the chair where George Washington daily
presided. At the back of the chair was painted the picture of a Sun on the
horizon. And turning to those sitting next to him, Franklin observed that
artists found it difficult in their painting to distinguish between a
rising and a setting Sun.

Well, I know if we were there, we could see those delegates sitting around
Franklin--leaning in to listen more closely to him. And then Dr. Franklin
began to share his deepest hopes and fears about the outcome of their
efforts, and this is what he said: "I have often looked at that picture
behind the President without being able to tell whether it was a rising or
setting Sun: But now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a
rising and not a setting Sun." Well, you can bet it's rising because, my
fellow citizens, America isn't finished. Her best days have just begun.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9:03 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Jim Wright, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio and television.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, and distinguished Members of the House and
Senate: When we first met here 7 years ago--many of us for the first
time--it was with the hope of beginning something new for America. We meet
here tonight in this historic Chamber to continue that work. If anyone
expects just a proud recitation of the accomplishments of my
administration, I say let's leave that to history; we're not finished yet.
So, my message to you tonight is put on your work shoes; we're still on the
job.

History records the power of the ideas that brought us here those 7 years
ago--ideas like the individual's right to reach as far and as high as his or
her talents will permit; the free market as an engine of economic progress.
And as an ancient Chinese philosopher, Lao-tzu, said: "Govern a great
nation as you would cook a small fish; do not overdo it." Well, these ideas
were part of a larger notion, a vision, if you will, of America
herself--an America not only rich in opportunity for the individual but an
America, too, of strong families and vibrant neighborhoods; an America
whose divergent but harmonizing communities were a reflection of a deeper
community of values: the value of work, of family, of religion, and of the
love of freedom that God places in each of us and whose defense He has
entrusted in a special way to this nation.

All of this was made possible by an idea I spoke of when Mr. Gorbachev was
here--the belief that the most exciting revolution ever known to humankind
began with three simple words: "We the People," the revolutionary notion
that the people grant government its rights, and not the other way around.
And there's one lesson that has come home powerfully to me, which I would
offer to you now. Just as those who created this Republic pledged to each
other their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor, so, too,
America's leaders today must pledge to each other that we will keep
foremost in our hearts and minds not what is best for ourselves or for our
party but what is best for America.

In the spirit of Jefferson, let us affirm that in this Chamber tonight
there are no Republicans, no Democrats--just Americans. Yes, we will have
our differences, but let us always remember what unites us far outweighs
whatever divides us. Those who sent us here to serve them--the millions of
Americans watching and listening tonight--expect this of us. Let's prove to
them and to ourselves that democracy works even in an election year. We've
done this before. And as we have worked together to bring down spending,
tax rates, and inflation, employment has climbed to record heights; America
has created more jobs and better, higher paying jobs; family income has
risen for 4 straight years, and America's poor climbed out of poverty at
the fastest rate in more than 10 years.

Our record is not just the longest peacetime expansion in history but an
economic and social revolution of hope based on work, incentives, growth,
and opportunity; a revolution of compassion that led to private sector
initiatives and a 77-percent increase in charitable giving; a revolution
that at a critical moment in world history reclaimed and restored the
American dream.

In international relations, too, there's only one description for what,
together, we have achieved: a complete turnabout, a revolution. Seven years
ago, America was weak, and freedom everywhere was under siege. Today
America is strong, and democracy is everywhere on the move. From Central
America to East Asia, ideas like free markets and democratic reforms and
human rights are taking hold. We've replaced "Blame America" with "Look up
to America." We've rebuilt our defenses. And of all our accomplishments,
none can give us more satisfaction than knowing that our young people are
again proud to wear our country's uniform.

And in a few moments, I'm going to talk about three developments--arms
reduction, the Strategic Defense Initiative, and the global democratic
revolution--that, when taken together, offer a chance none of us would have
dared imagine 7 years ago, a chance to rid the world of the two great
nightmares of the postwar era. I speak of the startling hope of giving our
children a future free of both totalitarianism and nuclear terror.

Tonight, then, we're strong, prosperous, at peace, and we are free. This is
the state of our Union. And if we will work together this year, I believe
we can give a future President and a future Congress the chance to make
that prosperity, that peace, that freedom not just the state of our Union
but the state of our world.

Toward this end, we have four basic objectives tonight. First, steps we can
take this year to keep our economy strong and growing, to give our children
a future of low inflation and full employment. Second, let's check our
progress in attacking social problems, where important gains have been
made, but which still need critical attention. I mean schools that work,
economic independence for the poor, restoring respect for family life and
family values. Our third objective tonight is global: continuing the
exciting economic and democratic revolutions we've seen around the world.
Fourth and finally, our nation has remained at peace for nearly a decade
and a half, as we move toward our goals of world prosperity and world
freedom. We must protect that peace and deter war by making sure the next
President inherits what you and I have a moral obligation to give that
President: a national security that is unassailable and a national defense
that takes full advantage of new technology and is fully funded.

This is a full agenda. It's meant to be. You see, my thinking on the next
year is quite simple: Let's make this the best of 8. And that means it's
all out--right to the finish line. I don't buy the idea that this is the
last year of anything, because we're not talking here tonight about
registering temporary gains but ways of making permanent our successes. And
that's why our focus is the values, the principles, and ideas that made
America great. Let's be clear on this point. We're for limited government,
because we understand, as the Founding Fathers did, that it is the best way
of ensuring personal liberty and empowering the individual so that every
American of every race and region shares fully in the flowering of American
prosperity and freedom.

One other thing we Americans like--the future--like the sound of it, the
idea of it, the hope of it. Where others fear trade and economic growth, we
see opportunities for creating new wealth and undreamed-of opportunities
for millions in our own land and beyond. Where others seek to throw up
barriers, we seek to bring them down. Where others take counsel of their
fears, we follow our hopes. Yes, we Americans like the future and like
making the most of it. Let's do that now.

And let's begin by discussing how to maintain economic growth by
controlling and eventually eliminating the problem of Federal deficits. We
have had a balanced budget only eight times in the last 57 years. For the
first time in 14 years, the Federal Government spent less in real terms
last year than the year before. We took $73 billion off last year's deficit
compared to the year before. The deficit itself has moved from 6.3 percent
of the gross national product to only 3.4 percent. And perhaps the most
important sign of progress has been the change in our view of deficits. You
know, a few of us can remember when, not too many years ago, those who
created the deficits said they would make us prosperous and not to worry
about the debt, because we owe it to ourselves. Well, at last there is
agreement that we can't spend ourselves rich.

Our recent budget agreement, designed to reduce Federal deficits by $76
billion over the next 2 years, builds on this consensus. But this agreement
must be adhered to without slipping into the errors of the past: more
broken promises and more unchecked spending. As I indicated in my first
State of the Union, what ails us can be simply put: The Federal Government
is too big, and it spends too much money. I can assure you, the bipartisan
leadership of Congress, of my help in fighting off any attempt to bust our
budget agreement. And this includes the swift and certain use of the veto
power.

Now, it's also time for some plain talk about the most immediate obstacle
to controlling Federal deficits. The simple but frustrating problem of
making expenses match revenues--something American families do and the
Federal Government can't--has caused crisis after crisis in this city. Mr.
Speaker, Mr. President, I will say to you tonight what I have said before
and will continue to say: The budget process has broken down; it needs a
drastic overhaul. With each ensuing year, the spectacle before the American
people is the same as it was this Christmas: budget deadlines delayed or
missed completely, monstrous continuing resolutions that pack hundreds of
billions of dollars worth of spending into one bill, and a Federal
Government on the brink of default.

I know I'm echoing what you here in the Congress have said, because you
suffered so directly. But let's recall that in 7 years, of 91
appropriations bills scheduled to arrive on my desk by a certain date, only
10 made it on time. Last year, of the 13 appropriations bills due by
October 1st, none of them made it. Instead, we had four continuing
resolutions lasting 41 days, then 36 days, and 2 days, and 3 days,
respectively.

And then, along came these behemoths. This is the conference report--1,053
pages, report weighing 14 pounds. Then this--a reconciliation bill 6 months
late that was 1,186 pages long, weighing 15 pounds. And the long-term
continuing resolution--this one was 2 months late, and it's 1,057 pages
long, weighing 14 pounds. That was a total of 43 pounds of paper and ink.
You had 3 hours--yes, 3 hours--to consider each, and it took 300 people at
my Office of Management and Budget just to read the bill so the Government
wouldn't shut down. Congress shouldn't send another one of these. No, and
if you do, I will not sign it.

Let's change all this. Instead of a Presidential budget that gets discarded
and a congressional budget resolution that is not enforced, why not a
simple partnership, a joint agreement that sets out the spending priorities
within the available revenues? And let's remember our deadline is October
1st, not Christmas. Let's get the people's work done in time to avoid a
footrace with Santa Claus. And, yes, this year--to coin a phrase--a new
beginning: 13 individual bills, on time and fully reviewed by Congress.

I'm also certain you join me in saying: Let's help ensure our future of
prosperity by giving the President a tool that, though I will not get to
use it, is one I know future Presidents of either party must have. Give the
President the same authority that 43 Governors use in their States: the
right to reach into massive appropriation bills, pare away the waste, and
enforce budget discipline. Let's approve the line-item veto.

And let's take a partial step in this direction. Most of you in this
Chamber didn't know what was in this catchall bill and report. Over the
past few weeks, we've all learned what was tucked away behind a little
comma here and there. For example, there's millions for items such as
cranberry research, blueberry research, the study of crawfish, and the
commercialization of wildflowers. And that's not to mention the five or so
million ($.5 million) that--so that people from developing nations could
come here to watch Congress at work. I won't even touch that. So, tonight I
offer you this challenge. In 30 days I will send back to you those items as
rescissions, which if I had the authority to line them out I would do so.

Now, review this multibillion-dollar package that will not undercut our
bipartisan budget agreement. As a matter of fact, if adopted, it will
improve our deficit reduction goals. And what an example we can set, that
we're serious about getting our financial accounts in order. By acting and
approving this plan, you have the opportunity to override a congressional
process that is out of control.

There is another vital reform. Yes, Gramm-Rudman-Hollings has been
profoundly helpful, but let us take its goal of a balanced budget and make
it permanent. Let us do now what so many States do to hold down spending
and what 32 State legislatures have asked us to do. Let us heed the wishes
of an overwhelming plurality of Americans and pass a constitutional
amendment that mandates a balanced budget and forces the Federal Government
to live within its means. Reform of the budget process--including the
line-item veto and balanced budget amendment--will, together with real
restraint on government spending, prevent the Federal budget from ever
again ravaging the family budget.

Let's ensure that the Federal Government never again legislates against the
family and the home. Last September 1 signed an Executive order on the
family requiring that every department and agency review its activities in
light of seven standards designed to promote and not harm the family. But
let us make certain that the family is always at the center of the public
policy process not just in this administration but in all future
administrations. It's time for Congress to consider, at the beginning, a
statement of the impact that legislation will have on the basic unit of
American society, the family.

And speaking of the family, let's turn to a matter on the mind of every
American parent tonight: education. We all know the sorry story of the
sixties and seventies--soaring spending, plummeting test scores--and that
hopeful trend of the eighties, when we replaced an obsession with dollars
with a commitment to quality, and test scores started back up. There's a
lesson here that we all should write on the blackboard a hundred times: In
a child's education, money can never take the place of basics like
discipline, hard work, and, yes, homework.

As a nation we do, of course, spend heavily on education--more than we
spend on defense. Yet across our country, Governors like New Jersey's Tom
Kean are giving classroom demonstrations that how we spend is as important
as how much we spend. Opening up the teaching profession to all qualified
candidates, merit pay--so that good teachers get A's as well as apples--and
stronger curriculum, as Secretary Bennett has proposed for high
schools--these imaginative reforms are making common sense the most popular
new kid in America's schools. How can we help? Well, we can talk about and
push for these reforms. But the most important thing we can do is to
reaffirm that control of our schools belongs to the States, local
communities and, most of all, to the parents and teachers.

My friends, some years ago, the Federal Government declared war on poverty,
and poverty won. Today the Federal Government has 59 major welfare programs
and spends more than $100 billion a year on them. What has all this money
done? Well, too often it has only made poverty harder to escape. Federal
welfare programs have created a massive social problem. With the best of
intentions, government created a poverty trap that wreaks havoc on the very
support system the poor need most to lift themselves out of poverty: the
family. Dependency has become the one enduring heirloom, passed from one
generation to the next, of too many fragmented families.

It is time--this may be the most radical thing I've said in 7 years in this
office--it's time for Washington to show a little humility. There are a
thousand sparks of genius in 50 States and a thousand communities around
the Nation. It is time to nurture them and see which ones can catch fire
and become guiding lights. States have begun to show us the way. They've
demonstrated that successful welfare programs can be built around more
effective child support enforcement practices and innovative programs
requiring welfare recipients to work or prepare for work. Let us give the
States more flexibility and encourage more reforms. Let's start making our
welfare system the first rung on America's ladder of opportunity, a boost
up from dependency, not a graveyard but a birthplace of hope.

And now let me turn to three other matters vital to family values and the
quality of family life. The first is an untold American success story.
Recently, we released our annual survey of what graduating high school
seniors have to say about drugs. Cocaine use is declining, and marijuana
use was the lowest since surveying began. We can be proud that our students
are just saying no to drugs. But let us remember what this menace requires:
commitment from every part of America and every single American, a
commitment to a drugfree America. The war against drugs is a war of
individual battles, a crusade with many heroes, including America's young
people and also someone very special to me. She has helped so many of our
young people to say no to drugs. Nancy, much credit belongs to you, and I
want to express to you your husband's pride and your country's thanks.'.
Surprised you, didn't I?

Well, now we come to a family issue that we must have the courage to
confront. Tonight, I call America--a good nation, a moral people--to
charitable but realistic consideration of the terrible cost of abortion on
demand. To those who say this violates a woman's right to control of her
own body: Can they deny that now medical evidence confirms the unborn child
is a living human being entitled to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness? Let us unite as a nation and protect the unborn with legislation
that would stop all Federal funding for abortion and with a human life
amendment making, of course, an exception where the unborn child threatens
the life of the mother. Our Judeo-Christian tradition recognizes the right
of taking a life in self-defense. But with that one exception, let us look
to those others in our land who cry out for children to adopt. I pledge to
you tonight I will work to remove barriers to adoption and extend full
sharing in family life to millions of Americans so that children who need
homes can be welcomed to families who want them and love them.

And let me add here: So many of our greatest statesmen have reminded us
that spiritual values alone are essential to our nation's health and vigor.
The Congress opens its proceedings each day, as does the Supreme Court,
with an acknowledgment of the Supreme Being. Yet we are denied the right to
set aside in our schools a moment each day for those who wish to pray. I
believe Congress should pass our school prayer amendment.

Now, to make sure there is a full nine member Supreme Court to interpret
the law, to protect the rights of all Americans, I urge the Senate to move
quickly and decisively in confirming Judge Anthony Kennedy to the highest
Court in the land and to also confirm 27 nominees now waiting to fill
vacancies in the Federal judiciary.

Here then are our domestic priorities. Yet if the Congress and the
administration work together, even greater opportunities lie ahead to
expand a growing world economy, to continue to reduce the threat of nuclear
arms, and to extend the frontiers of freedom and the growth of democratic
institutions.

Our policies consistently received the strongest support of the late
Congressman Dan Daniel of Virginia. I'm sure all of you join me in
expressing heartfelt condolences on his passing.

One of the greatest contributions the United States can make to the world
is to promote freedom as the key to economic growth. A creative,
competitive America is the answer to a changing world, not trade wars that
would close doors, create greater barriers, and destroy millions of jobs.
We should always remember: Protectionism is destructionism. America's jobs,
America's growth, America's future depend on trade--trade that is free,
open, and fair.

This year, we have it within our power to take a major step toward a
growing global economy and an expanding cycle of prosperity that reaches to
all the free nations of this Earth. I'm speaking of the historic free trade
agreement negotiated between our country and Canada. And I can also tell
you that we're determined to expand this concept, south as well as north.
Next month I will be traveling to Mexico, where trade matters will be of
foremost concern. And over the next several months, our Congress and the
Canadian Parliament can make the start of such a North American accord a
reality. Our goal must be a day when the free flow of trade, from the tip
of Tierra del Fuego to the Arctic Circle, unites the people of the Western
Hemisphere in a bond of mutually beneficial exchange, when all borders
become what the U.S.-Canadian border so long has been: a meeting place
rather than a dividing line.

This movement we see in so many places toward economic freedom is
indivisible from the worldwide movement toward political freedom and
against totalitarian rule. This global democratic revolution has removed
the specter, so frightening a decade ago, of democracy doomed to permanent
minority status in the world. In South and Central America, only a third of
the people enjoyed democratic rule in 1976. Today over 90 percent of Latin
Americans live in nations committed to democratic principles. And the
resurgence of democracy is owed to these courageous people on almost every
continent who have struggled to take control of their own destiny.

In Nicaragua the struggle has extra meaning, because that nation is so near
our own borders. The recent revelations of a former high-level Sandinista
major, Roger Miranda, show us that, even as they talk peace, the Communist
Sandinista government of Nicaragua has established plans for a large
600,000-man army. Yet even as these plans are made, the Sandinista regime
knows the tide is turning, and the cause of Nicaraguan freedom is riding at
its crest. Because of the freedom fighters, who are resisting Communist
rule, the Sandinistas have been forced to extend some democratic rights,
negotiate with church authorities, and release a few political prisoners.

The focus is on the Sandinistas, their promises and their actions. There is
a consensus among the four Central American democratic Presidents that the
Sandinistas have not complied with the plan to bring peace and democracy to
all of Central America. The Sandinistas again have promised reforms. Their
challenge is to take irreversible steps toward democracy. On Wednesday my
request to sustain the freedom fighters will be submitted, which reflects
our mutual desire for peace, freedom, and democracy in Nicaragua. I ask
Congress to pass this request. Let us be for the people of Nicaragua what
Lafayette, Pulaski, and Von Steuben were for our forefathers and the cause
of American independence.

So, too, in Afghanistan, the freedom fighters are the key to peace. We
support the Mujahidin. There can be no settlement unless all Soviet troops
are removed and the Afghan people are allowed genuine self-determination. I
have made my views on this matter known to Mr. Gorbachev. But not just
Nicaragua or Afghanistan--yes, everywhere we see a swelling freedom tide
across the world: freedom fighters rising up in Cambodia and Angola,
fighting and dying for the same democratic liberties we hold sacred. Their
cause is our cause: freedom.

Yet even as we work to expand world freedom, we must build a safer peace
and reduce the danger of nuclear war. But let's have no illusions. Three
years of steady decline in the value of our annual defense investment have
increased the risk of our most basic security interests, jeopardizing
earlier hard-won goals. We must face squarely the implications of this
negative trend and make adequate, stable defense spending a top goal both
this year and in the future.

This same concern applies to economic and security assistance programs as
well. But the resolve of America and its NATO allies has opened the way for
unprecedented achievement in arms reduction. Our recently signed INF treaty
is historic, because it reduces nuclear arms and establishes the most
stringent verification regime in arms control history, including several
forms of short-notice, on-site inspection. I submitted the treaty today,
and I urge the Senate to give its advice and consent to ratification of
this landmark agreement. Thank you very much.

In addition to the INF treaty, we're within reach of an even more
significant START agreement that will reduce U.S. and Soviet long-range
missile--or strategic arsenals by half. But let me be clear. Our approach
is not to seek agreement for agreement's sake but to settle only for
agreements that truly enhance our national security and that of our allies.
We will never put our security at risk--or that of our allies--just to reach
an agreement with the Soviets. No agreement is better than a bad
agreement.

As I mentioned earlier, our efforts are to give future generations what we
never had--a future free of nuclear terror. Reduction of strategic
offensive arms is one step, SDI another. Our funding request for our
Strategic Defense Initiative is less than 2 percent of the total defense
budget. SDI funding is money wisely appropriated and money well spent. SDI
has the same purpose and supports the same goals of arms reduction. It
reduces the risk of war and the threat of nuclear weapons to all mankind.
Strategic defenses that threaten no one could offer the world a safer, more
stable basis for deterrence. We must also remember that SDI is our
insurance policy against a nuclear accident, a Chernobyl of the sky, or an
accidental launch or some madman who might come along.

We've seen such changes in the world in 7 years. As totalitarianism
struggles to avoid being overwhelmed by the forces of economic advance and
the aspiration for human freedom, it is the free nations that are resilient
and resurgent. As the global democratic revolution has put totalitarianism
on the defensive, we have left behind the days of retreat. America is again
a vigorous leader of the free world, a nation that acts decisively and
firmly in the furtherance of her principles and vital interests. No legacy
would make me more proud than leaving in place a bipartisan consensus for
the cause of world freedom, a consensus that prevents a paralysis of
American power from ever occurring again.

But my thoughts tonight go beyond this, and I hope you'll let me end this
evening with a personal reflection. You know, the world could never be
quite the same again after Jacob Shallus, a trustworthy and dependable
clerk of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, took his pen and engrossed
those words about representative government in the preamble of our
Constitution. And in a quiet but final way, the course of human events was
forever altered when, on a ridge overlooking the Emmitsburg Pike in an
obscure Pennsylvania town called Gettysburg, Lincoln spoke of our duty to
government of and by the people and never letting it perish from the
Earth.

At the start of this decade, I suggested that we live in equally momentous
times, that it is up to us now to decide whether our form of government
would endure and whether history still had a place of greatness for a
quiet, pleasant, greening land called America. Not everything has been made
perfect in 7 years, nor will it be made perfect in seven times 70 years,
but before us, this year and beyond, are great prospects for the cause of
peace and world freedom.

It means, too, that the young Americans I spoke of 7 years ago, as well as
those who might be coming along the Virginia or Maryland shores this night
and seeing for the first time the lights of this Capital City--the lights
that cast their glow on our great halls of government and the monuments to
the memory of our great men--it means those young Americans will find a
city of hope in a land that is free.

We can be proud that for them and for us, as those lights along the Potomac
are still seen this night signaling as they have for nearly two centuries
and as we pray God they always will, that another generation of Americans
has protected and passed on lovingly this place called America, this
shining city on a hill, this government of, by, and for the people.

Thank you, and God bless you.

NOTE: The President spoke at 9:07 p.m. in the House Chamber of the Capitol.
He was introduced by Jim Wright, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The address was broadcast live on nationwide radio and television.
Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of
Congress, the first lady of the United States ...

... and citizens of America, tonight, as we mark the conclusion of our
celebration of Black History Month, we are reminded of our nation's path
toward civil rights and the work that still remains to be done.

Recent threats ...

Recent threats targeting Jewish community centers and vandalism of
Jewish cemeteries, as well as last week's shooting in Kansas City,
remind us that while we may be a nation divided on policies, we are a
country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all of its
very ugly forms.

Each American generation passes the torch of truth, liberty and justice,
in an unbroken chain all the way down to the present. That torch is now
in our hands. And we will use it to light up the world.

I am here tonight to deliver a message of unity and strength, and it is
a message deeply delivered from my heart. A new chapter ...

... of American greatness is now beginning. A new national pride is
sweeping across our nation. And a new surge of optimism is placing
impossible dreams firmly within our grasp. What we are witnessing today
is the renewal of the American spirit. Our allies will find that America
is once again ready to lead.

All the nations of the world  friend or foe  will find that America is
strong, America is proud, and America is free. In nine years, the United
States will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our founding, 250 years
since the day we declared our independence. It will be one of the great
milestones in the history of the world.

But what will America look like as we reach our 250th year? What kind of
country will we leave for our children? I will not allow the mistakes of
recent decades past to define the course of our future.

For too long, we've watched our middle class shrink as we've exported
our jobs and wealth to foreign countries. We've financed and built one
global project after another, but ignored the fates of our children in
the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit and so many other places
throughout our land.

We've defended the borders of other nations while leaving our own
borders wide open for anyone to cross, and for drugs to pour in at a now
unprecedented rate. And we've spent trillions and trillions of dollars
overseas, while our infrastructure at home has so badly crumbled.

Then, in 2016, the earth shifted beneath our feet. The rebellion started
as a quiet protest, spoken by families of all colors and creeds,
families who just wanted a fair shot for their children, and a fair
hearing for their concerns.

But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus, as thousands of citizens
now spoke out together, from cities small and large, all across our
country.

Finally, the chorus became an earthquake, and the people turned out by
the tens of millions, and they were all united by one very simple, but
crucial demand, that America must put its own citizens first, because
only then can we truly make America great again.

Dying industries will come roaring back to life. Heroic veterans will
get the care they so desperately need. Our military will be given the
resources its brave warriors so richly deserve.

Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced with new roads, bridges,
tunnels, airports and railways, gleaming across our very, very beautiful
land. Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down and ultimately stop. And
our neglected inner cities will see a rebirth of hope, safety and
opportunity.

Above all else, we will keep our promises to the American people.

Thank you. It's been a little over a month since my inauguration, and I
want to take this moment to update the nation on the progress I've made
in keeping those promises. Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler,
General Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel, Walmart and many
others have announced that they will invest billions and billions of
dollars in the United States and will create tens of thousands of new
American jobs.

The stock market has gained almost $3 trillion in value since the
election on Nov. 8, a record. We've saved taxpayers hundreds of millions
of dollars by bringing down the price of fantastic  and it is a
fantastic  new F-35 jet fighter, and we'll be saving billions more on
contracts all across our government.

We have placed a hiring freeze on nonmilitary and nonessential federal
workers.

We have begun to drain the swamp of government corruption by imposing a
five-year ban on lobbying by executive branch officials  and a lifetime
ban ...

Thank you. Thank you. And a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for a
foreign government. We have undertaken a historic effort to massively
reduce job-crushing regulations, creating a deregulation task force
inside of every government agency ...

... and we're imposing a new rule which mandates that for every one new
regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated.

We're going to stop the regulations that threaten the future and
livelihood of our great coal miners.

We have cleared the way for the construction of the Keystone and Dakota
Access Pipelines ...

... thereby creating tens of thousands of jobs. And I've issued a new
directive that new American pipelines be made with American steel.

We have withdrawn the United States from the job-killing Trans-Pacific
Partnership.

And with the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we have formed a
council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women
entrepreneurs have access to the networks, markets and capital they need
to start a business and live out their financial dreams.

To protect our citizens, I have directed the Department of Justice to
form a task force on reducing violent crime. I have further ordered the
Departments of Homeland Security and Justice, along with the Department
of State and the director of national intelligence, to coordinate an
aggressive strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels that have spread
all across our nation.

We will stop the drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our
youth, and we will expand treatment for those who have become so badly
addicted.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the
American people for immigration enforcement and border security.

By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the
unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our
communities safer for everyone.

We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an
environment of lawless chaos.

We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

For that reason, we will soon begin the construction of a great, great
wall along our southern border.

As we speak tonight, we are removing gang members, drug dealers and
criminals that threaten our communities and prey on our very innocent
citizens. Bad ones are going out as I speak, and as I promised
throughout the campaign. To any in Congress who do not believe we should
enforce our laws, I would ask you this one question: What would you say
to the American family that loses their jobs, their income or their
loved one because America refused to uphold its laws and defend its
borders?

Our obligation is to serve, protect and defend the citizens of the
United States. We are also taking strong measures to protect our nation
from radical Islamic terrorism.

According to data provided by the Department of Justice, the vast
majority of individuals convicted of terrorism and terrorism-related
offenses since 9/11 came here from outside of our country. We have seen
the attacks at home, from Boston to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and,
yes, even the World Trade Center. We have seen the attacks in France, in
Belgium, in Germany and all over the world.

It is not compassionate, but reckless to allow uncontrolled entry from
places where proper vetting cannot occur.

Those given the high honor of admission to the United States should
support this country and love its people and its values. We cannot allow
a beachhead of terrorism to form inside America, and we cannot allow our
nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.

That is why my administration has been working on improved vetting
procedures, and we will shortly take new steps to keep our nation safe,
and to keep those out who will do us harm.

As promised, I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to
demolish and destroy ISIS, a network of lawless savages that have
slaughtered Muslims and Christians, and men, women and children of all
faiths and all beliefs. We will work with our allies, including our
friends and allies in the Muslim world, to extinguish this vile enemy
from our planet.

I have also imposed new sanctions on entities and individuals who
support Iran's ballistic missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable
alliance with the state of Israel.

Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint a justice to the United
States Supreme Court, from my list of 20 judges, who will defend our
Constitution.

I am greatly honored to have Maureen Scalia with us in the gallery
tonight.

Thank you, Maureen. Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will
forever be a symbol of American justice.

To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil Gorsuch, a man of incredible
skill and deep devotion to the law. He was confirmed unanimously by the
Court of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to swiftly approve his
nomination.

Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must take as a country, we must
honestly acknowledge the circumstances we inherited. Ninety-four million
Americans are out of the labor force. Over 43 million people are now
living in poverty. And over 43 million Americans are on food stamps.

More than one in five people in their prime working years are not
working. We have the worst financial recovery in 65 years. In the last
eight years, the past administration has put on more new debt than
nearly all of the other presidents combined.

We've lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing jobs since Nafta
was approved, and we've lost 60,000 factories since China joined the
World Trade Organization in 2001. Our trade deficit in goods with the
world last year was nearly $800 billion. And overseas, we have inherited
a series of tragic foreign policy disasters.

Solving these and so many other pressing problems will require us to
work past the differences of party. It will require us to tap into the
American spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout our long
and storied history. But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad, we
must restart the engine of the American economy, making it easier for
companies to do business in the United States and much, much harder for
companies to leave our country.

Right now, American companies are taxed at one of the highest rates
anywhere in the world. My economic team is developing historic tax
reform that will reduce the tax rate on our companies so they can
compete and thrive anywhere and with anyone.

It will be a big, big cut.

At the same time, we will provide massive tax relief for the middle
class. We must create a level playing field for American companies and
our workers  have to do it.

Currently, when we ship products out of America, many other countries
make us pay very high tariffs and taxes, but when foreign companies ship
their products into America, we charge them nothing or almost nothing.

I just met with officials and workers from a great American company,
Harley-Davidson. In fact, they proudly displayed five of their
magnificent motorcycles, made in the U.S.A., on the front lawn of the
White House.

And they wanted me to ride one, and I said, "No, thank you."

At our meeting, I asked them, "How are you doing? How is business?" They
said that it's good. I asked them further, "How are you doing with other
countries, mainly international sales?"

They told me  without even complaining, because they have been so
mistreated for so long that they've become used to it  that it's very
hard to do business with other countries, because they tax our goods at
such a high rate. They said that in the case of another country, they
taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.

They weren't even asking for a change. But I am. I believe ...

I believe strongly in free trade, but it also has to be fair trade. It's
been a long time since we had fair trade.

The first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln, warned that "the
abandonment of the protective policy by the American government will
produce want and ruin among our people."

Lincoln was right, and it's time we heeded his advice and his words.

I am not going to let America and its great companies and workers be
taken  advantage of us any longer. They have taken advantage of our
country no longer.

I am going to bring back millions of jobs. Protecting our workers also
means reforming our system of legal immigration.

The current, outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers and
puts great pressure on taxpayers. Nations around the world, like Canada,
Australia and many others, have a merit-based immigration system.

It's a basic principle that those seeking to enter a country ought to be
able to support themselves financially. Yet in America we do not enforce
this rule, straining the very public resources that our poorest citizens
rely upon.

According to the National Academy of Sciences, our current immigration
system costs American taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.
Switching away from this current system of lower-skilled immigration,
and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more
benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages and help
struggling families, including immigrant families, enter the middle
class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy,
indeed.

I believe that real and positive immigration reform is possible, as long
as we focus on the following goals: to improve jobs and wages for
Americans, to strengthen our nation's security and to restore respect
for our laws.

If we are guided by the well-being of American citizens, then I believe
Republicans and Democrats can work together to achieve an outcome that
has eluded our country for decades.

Another Republican president, Dwight D. Eisenhower, initiated the last
truly great national infrastructure program: the building of the
interstate highway system. The time has come for a new program of
national rebuilding.

America has spent approximately $6 trillion in the Middle East, all the
while our infrastructure at home is crumbling.

With the $6 trillion, we could have rebuilt our country twice, and maybe
even three times, if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.

To launch our national rebuilding, I will be asking Congress to approve
legislation that produces a $1 trillion investment in infrastructure of
the United States, financed through both public and private capital,
creating millions of new jobs.

This effort will be guided by two core principles: Buy American and hire
American.

Tonight, I am also calling on this Congress to repeal and replace
Obamacare ...

... with reforms that expand choice, increase access, lower costs and at
the same time provide better health care.

Mandating every American to buy government-approved health insurance was
never the right solution for our country.

The way to make health insurance available to everyone is to lower the
cost of health insurance, and that is what we are going to do.

Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased by double and triple
digits. As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent last year alone. Gov.
Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said Obamacare is failing in his state, the
state of Kentucky, and it's unsustainable and collapsing.

One third of the counties have only one insurer, and they're losing them
fast, they are losing them so fast. They're leaving. And many Americans
have no choice at all. There's no choice left.

Remember when you were told that you could keep your doctor and keep
your plan? We now know that all of those promises have been totally
broken. Obamacare is collapsing, and we must act decisively to protect
all Americans.

Action is not a choice; it is a necessity. So I am calling on all
Democrats and Republicans in Congress to work with us to save Americans
from this imploding Obamacare disaster.

Here are the principles that should guide Congress as we move to create
a better health care system for all Americans.

First, we should ensure that Americans with pre-existing conditions have
access to coverage and that we have a stable transition for Americans
currently enrolled in the health care exchanges.

Secondly, we should help Americans purchase their own coverage, through
the use of tax credits and expanded health savings accounts, but it must
be the plan they want, not the plan forced on them by our government.

Thirdly, we should give our state governors the resources and
flexibility they need with Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.

Fourth, we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and
doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance and
work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs and bring them
down immediately.

And finally, the time has come to give Americans the freedom to purchase
health insurance across state lines ...

... which will create a truly competitive national marketplace that will
bring costs way down and provide far better care. So important.

Everything that is broken in our country can be fixed. Every problem can
be solved. And every hurting family can find healing and hope. Our
citizens deserve this, and so much more, so why not join forces and
finally get the job done and get it done right?

On this and so many other things, Democrats and Republicans should get
together and unite for the good of our country and for the good of the
American people.

My administration wants to work with members of both parties to make
child care accessible and affordable, to help ensure new parents that
they have paid family leave ...

... to invest in women's health, and to promote clean air and clean
water, and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.

True love for our people requires us to find common ground, to advance
the common good, and to cooperate on behalf of every American child who
deserves a much brighter future.

An incredible young woman is with us this evening who should serve as an
inspiration to us all. Today is Rare Disease Day, and joining us in the
gallery is a rare disease survivor, Megan Crowley. Megan ...

Megan was diagnosed with Pompe disease, a rare and serious illness, when
she was 15 months old. She was not expected to live past 5. On receiving
this news, Megan's dad, John, fought with everything he had to save the
life of his precious child. He founded a company to look for a cure and
helped develop the drug that saved Megan's life. Today she is 20 years
old and a sophomore at Notre Dame.

Megan's story is about the unbounded power of a father's love for a
daughter. But our slow and burdensome approval process at the Food and
Drug Administration keeps too many advances, like the one that saved
Megan's life, from reaching those in need.

If we slash the restraints, not just at the F.D.A. but across our
government, then we will be blessed with far more miracles just like
Megan.

In fact, our children will grow up in a nation of miracles. But to
achieve this future, we must enrich the mind  and the souls  of every
American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time.

I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that
funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of
African-American and Latino children.

These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter,
magnet, religious or home school that is right for them.

Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable woman, Denisha
Merriweather. As a young girl, Denisha struggled in school and failed
third grade twice. But then she was able to enroll in a private center
for learning  great learning center  with the help of a tax credit and a
scholarship program. Today, she is the first in her family to graduate,
not just from high school, but from college. Later this year, she will
get her master's degree in social work. We want all children to be able
to break the cycle of poverty just like Denisha.

But to break the cycle of poverty, we must also break the cycle of
violence. The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest single-year
increase in nearly half a century. In Chicago, more than 4,000 people
were shot last year alone, and the murder rate so far this year has been
even higher. This is not acceptable in our society.

Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community, to
attend a great school and to have access to a high-paying job.

But to create this future, we must work with  not against  not against 
the men and women of law enforcement.

We must build bridges of cooperation and trust, not drive the wedge of
disunity and it's  really, it's what it is, division. It's pure,
unadulterated division. We have to unify. Police and sheriffs are
members of our community. They're friends and neighbors, they're mothers
and fathers, sons and daughters, and they leave behind loved ones every
day who worry about whether or not they'll come home safe and sound. We
must support the incredible men and women of law enforcement.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department
of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The
office is called Voice, Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement.

We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and
silenced by special interests. Joining us ...

Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose
government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna
Oliver and Jessica Davis. Jamiel's 17-year-old son was viciously
murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member who had just been released
from prison. Jamiel Shaw Jr. was an incredible young man with unlimited
potential who was getting ready to go to college, where he would have
excelled as a great college quarterback.

But he never got the chance. His father, who is in the audience tonight,
has become a very good friend of mine. Jamiel, thank you. Thank you.

Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica Davis. Their husbands  Deputy
Sheriff Danny Oliver and Detective Michael Davis  were slain in the line
of duty in California. They were pillars of their community. These brave
men were viciously gunned down by an illegal immigrant with a criminal
record and two prior deportations. Should have never been in our
country.

Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna. Jenna, I want you to know
that your father was a hero and that tonight you have the love of an
entire country supporting you and praying for you.

To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica, I want you to know that we will
never stop fighting for justice. Your loved ones will never, ever be
forgotten. We will always honor their memory.

Finally, to keep America safe, we must provide the men and women of the
United States military with the tools they need to prevent war  if they
must  they have to fight and they only have to win.

I am sending Congress a budget that rebuilds the military, eliminates
the defense sequester...

... and calls for one of the largest increases in national defense
spending in American history.

My budget will also increase funding for our veterans. Our veterans have
delivered for this nation, and now we must deliver for them.

The challenges we face as a nation are great. But our people are even
greater. And none are greater or braver than those who fight for America
in uniform.

We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens, the widow of U.S.
Navy special operator, Senior Chief William "Ryan" Owens. Ryan died as
he lived, a warrior and a hero, battling against terrorism and securing
our nation.

I just spoke to our great General (Jim) Mattis just now who reconfirmed
that, and I quote, "Ryan was a part of a highly successful raid that
generated large amounts of vital intelligence that will lead to many
more victories in the future against our enemy."

Ryan's legacy is etched into eternity. Thank you.

And Ryan is looking down right now. You know that. And he's very happy,
because I think he just broke a record.

For as the Bible teaches us, there is no greater act of love than to lay
down one's life for one's friends. Ryan laid down his life for his
friends, for his country and for our freedom. And we will never forget
Ryan.

To those allies who wonder what kind of a friend America will be, look
no further than the heroes who wear our uniform. Our foreign policy
calls for a direct, robust and meaningful engagement with the world. It
is American leadership based on vital security interests that we share
with our allies all across the globe.

We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged through the bonds of two
world wars, that dethroned fascism ...

... and a Cold War and defeated communism.

But our partners must meet their financial obligations. And now, based
on our very strong and frank discussions, they are beginning to do just
that. In fact, I can tell you the money is pouring in. Very nice.

We expect our partners, whether in NATO, in the Middle East or in the
Pacific, to take a direct and meaningful role in both strategic and
military operations, and pay their fair share of the cost  have to do
that.

We will respect historic institutions, but we will respect the foreign
rights of all nations. And they have to respect our rights as a nation,
also.

Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing the will of the people,
and America respects the right of all nations to chart their own path.
My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United
States of America.

But we know that America is better off when there is less conflict, not
more. We must learn from the mistakes of the past. We have seen the war
and the destruction that have ravaged and raged throughout the world.
All across the world.

The only long-term solution for these humanitarian disasters, in many
cases, is to create the conditions where displaced persons can safely
return home and begin the long, long process of rebuilding.

America is willing to find new friends, and to forge new partnerships,
where shared interests align. We want harmony and stability, not war and
conflict. We want peace, wherever peace can be found. America is friends
today with former enemies. Some of our closest allies, decades ago,
fought on the opposite side of these terrible, terrible wars. This
history should give us all faith in the possibilities for a better
world.

Hopefully, the 250th year for America will see a world that is more
peaceful, more just, and more free.

On our 100th anniversary in 1876, citizens from across our nation came
to Philadelphia to celebrate America's centennial. At that celebration,
the country's builders and artists and inventors showed off their
wonderful creations. Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone for
the first time. Remington unveiled the first typewriter. An early
attempt was made at electric light. Thomas Edison showed an automatic
telegraph and an electric pen. Imagine the wonders our country could
know in America's 250th year.

Think of the marvels we could achieve if we simply set free the dreams
of our people. Cures to the illnesses that have always plagued us are
not too much to hope. American footprints on distant worlds are not too
big a dream. Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to
expect. And streets where mothers are safe from fear  schools where
children learn in peace, and jobs where Americans prosper and grow  are
not too much to ask.

When we have all of this, we will have made America greater than ever
before, for all Americans. This is our vision. This is our mission. But
we can only get there together. We are one people, with one destiny.

We all bleed the same blood. We all salute the same great American flag.
And we are all made by the same God.

When we fulfill this vision, when we celebrate our 250 years of glorious
freedom, we will look back on tonight as when this new chapter of
American greatness began. The time for small thinking is over. The time
for trivial fights is behind us. We just need the courage to share the
dreams that fill our hearts, the bravery to express the hopes that stir
our souls, and the confidence to turn those hopes and those dreams into
action.

From now on, America will be empowered by our aspirations, not burdened
by our fears, inspired by the future, not bound by failures of the past,
and guided by a vision, not blinded by our doubts.

I am asking all citizens to embrace this renewal of the American spirit.
I am asking all members of Congress to join me in dreaming big and bold
and daring things for our country. I am asking everyone watching tonight
to seize this moment. Believe in yourselves. Believe in your future. And
believe, once more, in America.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of
the United States, and my fellow Americans:

Less than 1 year has passed since I first stood at this podium, in this
majestic chamber, to speak on behalf of the American People -- and to
address their concerns, their hopes, and their dreams. That night, our
new Administration had already taken swift action. A new tide of
optimism was already sweeping across our land.

Each day since, we have gone forward with a clear vision and a righteous
mission -- to make America great again for all Americans.

Over the last year, we have made incredible progress and achieved
extraordinary success. We have faced challenges we expected, and others
we could never have imagined. We have shared in the heights of victory
and the pains of hardship. We endured floods and fires and storms. But
through it all, we have seen the beauty of America's soul, and the steel
in America's spine.

Each test has forged new American heroes to remind us who we are, and
show us what we can be.

We saw the volunteers of the "Cajun Navy," racing to the rescue with
their fishing boats to save people in the aftermath of a devastating
hurricane.

We saw strangers shielding strangers from a hail of gunfire on the Las
Vegas strip.

We heard tales of Americans like Coast Guard Petty Officer Ashlee
Leppert, who is here tonight in the gallery with Melania. Ashlee was
aboard one of the first helicopters on the scene in Houston during
Hurricane Harvey. Through 18 hours of wind and rain, Ashlee braved live
power lines and deep water, to help save more than 40 lives. Thank you,
Ashlee.

We heard about Americans like firefighter David Dahlberg. He is here
with us too. David faced down walls of flame to rescue almost 60
children trapped at a California summer camp threatened by wildfires.

To everyone still recovering in Texas, Florida, Louisiana, Puerto Rico,
the Virgin Islands, California, and everywhere else -- we are with you,
we love you, and we will pull through together.

Some trials over the past year touched this chamber very personally.
With us tonight is one of the toughest people ever to serve in this
House -- a guy who took a bullet, almost died, and was back to work
three and a half months later: the legend from Louisiana, Congressman
Steve Scalise.

We are incredibly grateful for the heroic efforts of the Capitol Police
Officers, the Alexandria Police, and the doctors, nurses, and paramedics
who saved his life, and the lives of many others in this room.

In the aftermath of that terrible shooting, we came together, not as
Republicans or Democrats, but as representatives of the people. But it
is not enough to come together only in times of tragedy. Tonight, I call
upon all of us to set aside our differences, to seek out common ground,
and to summon the unity we need to deliver for the people we were
elected to serve.

Over the last year, the world has seen what we always knew: that no
people on Earth are so fearless, or daring, or determined as Americans.
If there is a mountain, we climb it. If there is a frontier, we cross
it. If there is a challenge, we tame it. If there is an opportunity, we
seize it.

So let us begin tonight by recognizing that the state of our Union is
strong because our people are strong.

And together, we are building a safe, strong, and proud America.

Since the election, we have created 2.4 million new jobs, including
200,000 new jobs in manufacturing alone. After years of wage stagnation,
we are finally seeing rising wages.

Unemployment claims have hit a 45-year low. African-American
unemployment stands at the lowest rate ever recorded, and Hispanic
American unemployment has also reached the lowest levels in history.

Small business confidence is at an all-time high. The stock market has
smashed one record after another, gaining $8 trillion in value. That is
great news for Americans' 401k, retirement, pension, and college savings
accounts.

And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months
ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history.

Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and
small businesses.

To lower tax rates for hardworking Americans, we nearly doubled the
standard deduction for everyone. Now, the first $24,000 earned by a
married couple is completely tax-free. We also doubled the child tax
credit.

A typical family of four making $75,000 will see their tax bill reduced
by $2,000 -- slashing their tax bill in half.

This April will be the last time you ever file under the old broken
system -- and millions of Americans will have more take-home pay
starting next month.

We eliminated an especially cruel tax that fell mostly on Americans
making less than $50,000 a year -- forcing them to pay tremendous
penalties simply because they could not afford government-ordered health
plans. We repealed the core of disastrous Obamacare -- the individual
mandate is now gone.

We slashed the business tax rate from 35 percent all the way down to 21
percent, so American companies can compete and win against anyone in the
world. These changes alone are estimated to increase average family
income by more than $4,000.

Small businesses have also received a massive tax cut, and can now
deduct 20 percent of their business income.

Here tonight are Steve Staub and Sandy Keplinger of Staub Manufacturing
-- a small business in Ohio. They have just finished the best year in
their 20-year history. Because of tax reform, they are handing out
raises, hiring an additional 14 people, and expanding into the building
next door.

One of Staub's employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is
an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost
his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where
he trained to become a welder. Like many hardworking Americans, Corey
plans to invest his taxcut raise into his new home and his two
daughters' education. Please join me in congratulating Corey.

Since we passed tax cuts, roughly 3 million workers have already gotten
tax cut bonuses -- many of them thousands of dollars per worker. Apple
has just announced it plans to invest a total of $350 billion in
America, and hire another 20,000 workers.

This is our new American moment. There has never been a better time to
start living the American Dream.

So to every citizen watching at home tonight -- no matter where you have
been, or where you come from, this is your time. If you work hard, if
you believe in yourself, if you believe in America, then you can dream
anything, you can be anything, and together, we can achieve anything.

Tonight, I want to talk about what kind of future we are going to have,
and what kind of Nation we are going to be. All of us, together, as one
team, one people, and one American family.

We all share the same home, the same heart, the same destiny, and the
same great American flag.

Together, we are rediscovering the American way.

In America, we know that faith and family, not government and
bureaucracy, are the center of the American life. Our motto is "in God
we trust."

And we celebrate our police, our military, and our amazing veterans as
heroes who deserve our total and unwavering support.

Here tonight is Preston Sharp, a 12-year-old boy from Redding,
California, who noticed that veterans' graves were not marked with flags
on Veterans Day. He decided to change that, and started a movement that
has now placed 40,000 flags at the graves of our great heroes. Preston:
a job well done.

Young patriots like Preston teach all of us about our civic duty as
Americans. Preston's reverence for those who have served our Nation
reminds us why we salute our flag, why we put our hands on our hearts
for the pledge of allegiance, and why we proudly stand for the national
anthem.

Americans love their country. And they deserve a Government that shows
them the same love and loyalty in return.

For the last year we have sought to restore the bonds of trust between
our citizens and their Government.

Working with the Senate, we are appointing judges who will interpret the
Constitution as written, including a great new Supreme Court Justice,
and more circuit court judges than any new administration in the history
of our country.

We are defending our Second Amendment, and have taken historic actions
to protect religious liberty.

And we are serving our brave veterans, including giving our veterans
choice in their healthcare decisions. Last year, the Congress passed,
and I signed, the landmark VA Accountability Act. Since its passage, my
Administration has already removed more than 1,500 VA employees who
failed to give our veterans the care they deserve -- and we are hiring
talented people who love our vets as much as we do.

I will not stop until our veterans are properly taken care of, which has
been my promise to them from the very beginning of this great journey.

All Americans deserve accountability and respect -- and that is what we
are giving them. So tonight, I call on the Congress to empower every
Cabinet Secretary with the authority to reward good workers -- and to
remove Federal employees who undermine the public trust or fail the
American people.

In our drive to make Washington accountable, we have eliminated more
regulations in our first year than any administration in history.

We have ended the war on American Energy -- and we have ended the war on
clean coal. We are now an exporter of energy to the world.

In Detroit, I halted Government mandates that crippled America's
autoworkers -- so we can get the Motor City revving its engines once
again.

Many car companies are now building and expanding plants in the United
States -- something we have not seen for decades. Chrysler is moving a
major plant from Mexico to Michigan; Toyota and Mazda are opening up a
plant in Alabama. Soon, plants will be opening up all over the country.
This is all news Americans are unaccustomed to hearing -- for many
years, companies and jobs were only leaving us. But now they are coming
back.

Exciting progress is happening every day.

To speed access to breakthrough cures and affordable generic drugs, last
year the FDA approved more new and generic drugs and medical devices
than ever before in our history.

We also believe that patients with terminal conditions should have
access to experimental treatments that could potentially save their
lives.

People who are terminally ill should not have to go from country to
country to seek a cure -- I want to give them a chance right here at
home. It is time for the Congress to give these wonderful Americans the
"right to try."

One of my greatest priorities is to reduce the price of prescription
drugs. In many other countries, these drugs cost far less than what we
pay in the United States. That is why I have directed my Administration
to make fixing the injustice of high drug prices one of our top
priorities. Prices will come down.

America has also finally turned the page on decades of unfair trade
deals that sacrificed our prosperity and shipped away our companies, our
jobs, and our Nation's wealth.

The era of economic surrender is over.

From now on, we expect trading relationships to be fair and to be
reciprocal.

We will work to fix bad trade deals and negotiate new ones.

And we will protect American workers and American intellectual property,
through strong enforcement of our trade rules.

As we rebuild our industries, it is also time to rebuild our crumbling
infrastructure.

America is a nation of builders. We built the Empire State Building in
just 1 year -- is it not a disgrace that it can now take 10 years just
to get a permit approved for a simple road?

I am asking both parties to come together to give us the safe, fast,
reliable, and modern infrastructure our economy needs and our people
deserve.

Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to produce a bill that generates
at least $1.5 trillion for the new infrastructure investment we need.

Every Federal dollar should be leveraged by partnering with State and
local governments and, where appropriate, tapping into private sector
investment -- to permanently fix the infrastructure deficit.

Any bill must also streamline the permitting and approval process --
getting it down to no more than two years, and perhaps even one.

Together, we can reclaim our building heritage. We will build gleaming
new roads, bridges, highways, railways, and waterways across our land.
And we will do it with American heart, American hands, and American
grit.

We want every American to know the dignity of a hard day's work. We want
every child to be safe in their home at night. And we want every citizen
to be proud of this land that we love.

We can lift our citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to
independence, and from poverty to prosperity.

As tax cuts create new jobs, let us invest in workforce development and
job training. Let us open great vocational schools so our future workers
can learn a craft and realize their full potential. And let us support
working families by supporting paid family leave.

As America regains its strength, this opportunity must be extended to
all citizens. That is why this year we will embark on reforming our
prisons to help former inmates who have served their time get a second
chance.

Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be
helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of
American workers and American families.

For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our
most vulnerable communities. They have allowed millions of low-wage
workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans.
Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.

Here tonight are two fathers and two mothers: Evelyn Rodriguez, Freddy
Cuevas, Elizabeth Alvarado, and Robert Mickens. Their two teenage
daughters -- Kayla Cuevas and Nisa Mickens -- were close friends on Long
Island. But in September 2016, on the eve of Nisa's 16th Birthday,
neither of them came home. These two precious girls were brutally
murdered while walking together in their hometown. Six members of the
savage gang MS13 have been charged with Kayla and Nisa's murders. Many
of these gang members took advantage of glaring loopholes in our laws to
enter the country as unaccompanied alien minors - and wound up in Kayla
and Nisa's high school.

Evelyn, Elizabeth, Freddy, and Robert: Tonight, everyone in this chamber
is praying for you. Everyone in America is grieving for you. And 320
million hearts are breaking for you. We cannot imagine the depth of your
sorrow, but we can make sure that other families never have to endure
this pain.

Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to finally close the deadly
loopholes that have allowed MS13, and other criminals, to break into
our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our
immigration laws, and support our ICE and Border Patrol Agents, so that
this cannot ever happen again.

The United States is a compassionate nation. We are proud that we do
more than any other country to help the needy, the struggling, and the
underprivileged all over the world. But as President of the United
States, my highest loyalty, my greatest compassion, and my constant
concern is for America's children, America's struggling workers, and
America's forgotten communities. I want our youth to grow up to achieve
great things. I want our poor to have their chance to rise.

So tonight, I am extending an open hand to work with members of both
parties -- Democrats and Republicans -- to protect our citizens of every
background, color, religion, and creed. My duty, and the sacred duty of
every elected official in this chamber, is to defend Americans -- to
protect their safety, their families, their communities, and their right
to the American Dream. Because Americans are dreamers too.

Here tonight is one leader in the effort to defend our country: Homeland
Security Investigations Special Agent Celestino Martinez -- he goes by
CJ. CJ served 15 years in the Air Force before becoming an ICE agent and
spending the last 15 years fighting gang violence and getting dangerous
criminals off our streets. At one point, MS13 leaders ordered CJ's
murder. But he did not cave to threats or fear. Last May, he commanded
an operation to track down gang members on Long Island. His team has
arrested nearly 400, including more than 220 from MS13.

CJ: Great work. Now let us get the Congress to send you some
reinforcements.

Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an
immigration reform package.

In recent months, my Administration has met extensively with both
Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration
reform. Based on these discussions, we presented the Congress with a
detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair
compromise -- one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our
country gets the critical reforms it needs.

Here are the four pillars of our plan:

The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to
citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by
their parents at a young age -- that covers almost three times more
people than the previous administration. Under our plan, those who meet
education and work requirements, and show good moral character, will be
able to become full citizens of the United States.

The second pillar fully secures the border. That means building a wall
on the Southern border, and it means hiring more heroes like CJ to keep
our communities safe. Crucially, our plan closes the terrible loopholes
exploited by criminals and terrorists to enter our country -- and it
finally ends the dangerous practice of "catch and release."

The third pillar ends the visa lottery -- a program that randomly hands
out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of
our people. It is time to begin moving towards a merit-based immigration
system -- one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who
will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our
country.

The fourth and final pillar protects the nuclear family by ending chain
migration. Under the current broken system, a single immigrant can bring
in virtually unlimited numbers of distant relatives. Under our plan, we
focus on the immediate family by limiting sponsorships to spouses and
minor children. This vital reform is necessary, not just for our
economy, but for our security, and our future.

In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by
the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these
programs present risks we can no longer afford.

It is time to reform these outdated immigration rules, and finally bring
our immigration system into the 21st century.

These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise, and one that
will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system.

For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this
problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen.

Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that
fulfills my ironclad pledge to only sign a bill that puts America first.
So let us come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job
done.

These reforms will also support our response to the terrible crisis of
opioid and drug addiction.

In 2016, we lost 64,000 Americans to drug overdoses: 174 deaths per day.
Seven per hour. We must get much tougher on drug dealers and pushers if
we are going to succeed in stopping this scourge.

My Administration is committed to fighting the drug epidemic and helping
get treatment for those in need. The struggle will be long and difficult
-- but, as Americans always do, we will prevail.

As we have seen tonight, the most difficult challenges bring out the
best in America.

We see a vivid expression of this truth in the story of the Holets
family of New Mexico. Ryan Holets is 27 years old, and an officer with
the Albuquerque Police Department. He is here tonight with his wife
Rebecca. Last year, Ryan was on duty when he saw a pregnant, homeless
woman preparing to inject heroin. When Ryan told her she was going to
harm her unborn child, she began to weep. She told him she did not know
where to turn, but badly wanted a safe home for her baby.

In that moment, Ryan said he felt God speak to him: "You will do it --
because you can." He took out a picture of his wife and their four kids.
Then, he went home to tell his wife Rebecca. In an instant, she agreed
to adopt. The Holets named their new daughter Hope.

Ryan and Rebecca: You embody the goodness of our Nation. Thank you, and
congratulations.

As we rebuild America's strength and confidence at home, we are also
restoring our strength and standing abroad.

Around the world, we face rogue regimes, terrorist groups, and rivals
like China and Russia that challenge our interests, our economy, and our
values. In confronting these dangers, we know that weakness is the
surest path to conflict, and unmatched power is the surest means of our
defense.

For this reason, I am asking the Congress to end the dangerous defense
sequester and fully fund our great military.

As part of our defense, we must modernize and rebuild our nuclear
arsenal, hopefully never having to use it, but making it so strong and
powerful that it will deter any acts of aggression. Perhaps someday in
the future there will be a magical moment when the countries of the
world will get together to eliminate their nuclear weapons.
Unfortunately, we are not there yet.

Last year, I also pledged that we would work with our allies to
extinguish ISIS from the face of the Earth. One year later, I am proud
to report that the coalition to defeat ISIS has liberated almost 100
percent of the territory once held by these killers in Iraq and Syria.
But there is much more work to be done. We will continue our fight until
ISIS is defeated.

Army Staff Sergeant Justin Peck is here tonight. Near Raqqa last
November, Justin and his comrade, Chief Petty Officer Kenton Stacy, were
on a mission to clear buildings that ISIS had rigged with explosives so
that civilians could return to the city.

Clearing the second floor of a vital hospital, Kenton Stacy was severely
wounded by an explosion. Immediately, Justin bounded into the
booby-trapped building and found Kenton in bad shape. He applied
pressure to the wound and inserted a tube to reopen an airway. He then
performed CPR for 20 straight minutes during the ground transport and
maintained artificial respiration through 2 hours of emergency surgery.

Kenton Stacy would have died if not for Justin's selfless love for a
fellow warrior. Tonight, Kenton is recovering in Texas. Raqqa is
liberated. And Justin is wearing his new Bronze Star, with a "V" for
"Valor." Staff Sergeant Peck: All of America salutes you.

Terrorists who do things like place bombs in civilian hospitals are
evil. When possible, we annihilate them. When necessary, we must be able
to detain and question them. But we must be clear: Terrorists are not
merely criminals. They are unlawful enemy combatants. And when captured
overseas, they should be treated like the terrorists they are.

In the past, we have foolishly released hundreds of dangerous
terrorists, only to meet them again on the battlefield -- including the
ISIS leader, al-Baghdadi.

So today, I am keeping another promise. I just signed an order directing
Secretary Mattis to reexamine our military detention policy and to keep
open the detention facilities at Guantnamo Bay.

I am also asking the Congress to ensure that, in the fight against ISIS
and al-Qa'ida, we continue to have all necessary power to detain
terrorists -- wherever we chase them down.

Our warriors in Afghanistan also have new rules of engagement. Along
with their heroic Afghan partners, our military is no longer undermined
by artificial timelines, and we no longer tell our enemies our plans.

Last month, I also took an action endorsed unanimously by the Senate
just months before: I recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

Shortly afterwards, dozens of countries voted in the United Nations
General Assembly against America's sovereign right to make this
recognition. American taxpayers generously send those same countries
billions of dollars in aid every year.

That is why, tonight, I am asking the Congress to pass legislation to
help ensure American foreign-assistance dollars always serve American
interests, and only go to America's friends.

As we strengthen friendships around the world, we are also restoring
clarity about our adversaries.

When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt
dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of
Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom.

I am asking the Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the
terrible Iran nuclear deal.

My Administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and
socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.

But no regime has oppressed its own citizens more totally or brutally
than the cruel dictatorship in North Korea.

North Korea's reckless pursuit of nuclear missiles could very soon
threaten our homeland.

We are waging a campaign of maximum pressure to prevent that from
happening.

Past experience has taught us that complacency and concessions only
invite aggression and provocation. I will not repeat the mistakes of
past administrations that got us into this dangerous position.

We need only look at the depraved character of the North Korean regime
to understand the nature of the nuclear threat it could pose to America
and our allies.

Otto Warmbier was a hardworking student at the University of Virginia.
On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea.
At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged
with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship
sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to
America last June -- horribly injured and on the verge of death. He
passed away just days after his return.

Otto's Parents, Fred and Cindy Warmbier, are with us tonight -- along
with Otto's brother and sister, Austin and Greta. You are powerful
witnesses to a menace that threatens our world, and your strength
inspires us all. Tonight, we pledge to honor Otto's memory with American
resolve.

Finally, we are joined by one more witness to the ominous nature of this
regime. His name is Mr. Ji Seong-ho.

In 1996, Seong-ho was a starving boy in North Korea. One day, he tried
to steal coal from a railroad car to barter for a few scraps of food. In
the process, he passed out on the train tracks, exhausted from hunger.
He woke up as a train ran over his limbs. He then endured multiple
amputations without anything to dull the pain. His brother and sister
gave what little food they had to help him recover and ate dirt
themselves -- permanently stunting their own growth. Later, he was
tortured by North Korean authorities after returning from a brief visit
to China. His tormentors wanted to know if he had met any Christians. He
had -- and he resolved to be free.

Seong-ho traveled thousands of miles on crutches across China and
Southeast Asia to freedom. Most of his family followed. His father was
caught trying to escape, and was tortured to death.

Today he lives in Seoul, where he rescues other defectors, and
broadcasts into North Korea what the regime fears the most - the truth.

Today he has a new leg, but Seong-ho, I understand you still keep those
crutches as a reminder of how far you have come. Your great sacrifice is
an inspiration to us all.

Seong-ho's story is a testament to the yearning of every human soul to
live in freedom.

It was that same yearning for freedom that nearly 250 years ago gave
birth to a special place called America. It was a small cluster of
colonies caught between a great ocean and a vast wilderness. But it was
home to an incredible people with a revolutionary idea: that they could
rule themselves. That they could chart their own destiny. And that,
together, they could light up the world.

That is what our country has always been about. That is what Americans
have always stood for, always strived for, and always done.

Atop the dome of this Capitol stands the Statue of Freedom. She stands
tall and dignified among the monuments to our ancestors who fought and
lived and died to protect her.

Monuments to Washington and Jefferson -- to Lincoln and King.

Memorials to the heroes of Yorktown and Saratoga -- to young Americans
who shed their blood on the shores of Normandy, and the fields beyond.
And others, who went down in the waters of the Pacific and the skies
over Asia.

And freedom stands tall over one more monument: this one. This Capitol.
This living monument to the American people.

A people whose heroes live not only in the past, but all around us --
defending hope, pride, and the American way.

They work in every trade. They sacrifice to raise a family. They care
for our children at home. They defend our flag abroad. They are strong
moms and brave kids. They are firefighters, police officers, border
agents, medics, and Marines.

But above all else, they are Americans. And this Capitol, this city, and
this Nation, belong to them.

Our task is to respect them, to listen to them, to serve them, to
protect them, and to always be worthy of them.

Americans fill the world with art and music. They push the bounds of
science and discovery. And they forever remind us of what we should
never forget: The people dreamed this country. The people built this
country. And it is the people who are making America great again.

As long as we are proud of who we are, and what we are fighting for,
there is nothing we cannot achieve.

As long as we have confidence in our values, faith in our citizens, and
trust in our God, we will not fail.

Our families will thrive.

Our people will prosper.

And our Nation will forever be safe and strong and proud and mighty and
free.

Thank you, and God bless America.
